LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


2985150R
665
Annu Rev Biochem
Annu Rev Biochem
Annual review of biochemistry
0066-4154
1545-4509

35303786
9634960
10.1146/annurev-biochem-032620-104801
NIHMS1844218
Article
Lipoproteins in the Central Nervous System: From Biology to Pathobiology
Raulin Ana-Caroline
Martens Yuka A.
Bu Guojun
Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, USA
bu.guojun@mayo.edu
30 10 2022
21 6 2022
18 3 2022
21 6 2023
91 731759
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
The brain, as one of the most lipid-rich organs, heavily relies on lipid transport and distribution to maintain homeostasis and neuronal function. Lipid transport mediated by lipoprotein particles, which are complex structures composed of apolipoproteins and lipids, has been thoroughly characterized in the periphery. Although lipoproteins in the central nervous system (CNS) were reported over half a century ago, the identification of APOE4 as the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease has accelerated investigation of the biology and pathobiology of lipoproteins in the CNS. This review provides an overview of the different components of lipoprotein particles, in particular apolipoproteins, and their involvements in both physiological functions and pathological mechanisms in the CNS.

lipoproteins
central nervous system
apolipoproteins
apoE
apoJ
Alzheimer’s disease

pmc1. INTRODUCTION

The brain is a lipid-rich organ, with lipids constituting approximately half of its dry weight. Various types of lipids are important constituents of cell membranes, key to their integrity and remodeling (1, 2). They are also critical components of the myelin sheath insulating axons and allowing nerve impulses to travel rapidly and effectively. First characterized in plasma, lipid transport and distribution are mediated by lipoprotein particles, which are intricate structures formed with apolipoproteins and lipids (2, 3). Major lipids incorporated in lipoprotein particles can be divided into four major groups: phospholipids, unesterified cholesterol, cholesteryl esters, and triglycerides. Most types of known lipids are found in the brain, although triglycerides seem to exist only in trace amounts (2, 4).

Despite having first been described half a century ago, growing interest in understanding lipids and lipoproteins in the central nervous system (CNS) can be traced to the identification in 1993 of APOE4, which encodes for apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4), as the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (5, 6). Interests in lipoprotein metabolism have also been accelerated by studies on other neurological, neurodegenerative, and neuropsychiatric disorders (7). The collective efforts on studying lipid-related brain diseases have led to greater understanding of the biogenesis of lipoproteins in the CNS and how they are involved in lipid transport and distribution, which are essential for lipid bilayer integrity and dynamics, as well as synaptic plasticity and injury repair (8-10).

In this review, we aim to provide a comprehensive overview of the biology and pathobiology of lipoproteins in the CNS. We focus on the different components of lipoproteins and their involvement under both physiological and pathological conditions.

1.1. Lipoproteins: Structure and Lipid Composition

Lipoproteins are macromolecules composed of lipids and one or more proteins called apolipoproteins. Neutral lipids, such as triglycerides and cholesteryl esters, are packaged within a hydrophobic core that is surrounded by a hydrophilic layer formed of phospholipids and free cholesterol (11). Apolipoproteins embedded in the hydrophilic layer bind to various cell surface receptors, thereby delivering lipid cargos to target cells (3).

Lipids incorporated into lipoproteins for redistribution play critical roles in membrane homeostasis and energy metabolism. Unesterified free cholesterol is especially abundant in the brain, where it is an essential component of neuronal and glial membranes and of myelin. It is synthesized and metabolized within the brain parenchyma (12, 13). One step in cholesterol metabolism is esterification, with cholesteryl ester droplets serving as a reservoir for cholesterol (14). However, disruption of cholesterol homeostasis in the CNS has been reported in neurodegenerative disorders (13, 15, 16), thus driving greater interest in understanding cholesterol metabolism in the brain.

Although cholesterol is the most studied lipid in the brain, phospholipids are more abundant, in both cell membranes and myelin. Phospholipids make up just under half of the total dry brain weight (17). In addition to being a predominant structural component of cells, they are also involved in signaling pathways that may become dysregulated under pathological conditions, such as inflammation, hypoxia, ischemia, and degenerative disorders (17).

As previously mentioned, triglycerides are relatively scarce in the brain (1, 2, 4). In the periphery, triglycerides are metabolized into fatty acids used for energy production or storage (11). However, it is still unclear whether and to what extent triglycerides are involved in brain energy metabolism.

1.2. Apolipoproteins in the Brain and in the Periphery

Apolipoproteins in lipoprotein particles fulfill multiple roles, such as regulating lipoprotein assembly, transport, and metabolism through interactions with enzymes and receptors (18). There are various classes of apolipoproteins that differ in the type of lipoproteins they form, the receptors they bind, and their role in lipoprotein metabolism. For example, apoB plays a major role in lipid transport and metabolism in the periphery, but it is neither expressed nor found in the CNS (2). ApoE, however, is the most abundant apolipoprotein in the brain and is also highly expressed in the periphery particularly in hepatocytes and macrophages. Other apolipoproteins, including apoA, apoC, apoD, apoH, and apoJ (also known as clusterin), are found in varying amounts in the brain and periphery. In this review, we focus on the roles of apoE and apoJ, the two major apolipoproteins found in brain parenchyma.

2. LIPOPROTEINS IN THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM AND IN THE PERIPHERY

2.1. Lipoproteins in Plasma

Lipoproteins in the periphery are varied in size and composition, resulting in a wide range of distinctive lipid-related functions.

2.1.1. Types of lipoproteins in the periphery.

Most current knowledge of lipoproteins comes from studies in the periphery, due to their involvement in diseases such as atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular diseases (19). There are four major classes of lipoproteins that differ in size, composition, and density, each having a distinct function. Chylomicrons are the largest in size, with a diameter greater than 100 nm, followed by very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), with diameters 30–90 nm; intermediate low-density lipoproteins (IDL) and low-density lipoproteins (LDL) are slightly smaller, with diameters of approximately 20 nm; and high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are the smallest, with diameters of 8–12 nm (19) (Figure 1).

2.1.2. Chylomicron metabolism in plasma.

Plasma lipoprotein function is tightly linked to dietary lipid processing, from their absorption to transport to target sites and their metabolism (2). Dietary triglycerides and cholesteryl esters absorbed in the intestine are assembled into chylomicron particles containing various apolipoproteins, including apoB and apoE (19, 20). Hydrolysis of triglycerides in chylomicrons generates fatty acids that either serve as fuel for different cell types or are stored as triglycerides in adipocytes. Chylomicron remnants are taken up by hepatic cells through binding to apoE receptors, members of the LDL receptor (LDLR) family, where they are further metabolized (19). Lipid transport from the liver to peripheral tissues is initially mediated by VLDL containing both apoE and apoB. These lipoproteins are rich in triglycerides, but gradual hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase generates smaller, cholesterol-rich IDL and ultimately LDL. The apolipoprotein composition of lipoproteins in plasma changes during their metabolism (21).

2.1.3. Reverse cholesterol transport.

The main function of HDL is to clear excess cholesterol from peripheral tissues for elimination by the liver through a process known as reverse cholesterol transport (19). While VLDL, IDL, and LDL originate from the sequential catabolism of chylomicrons, HDL formation follows a different pathway that starts in hepatocytes and intestinal enterocytes that synthesize apoA1 (2). Cholesterol is incorporated into HDL discs composed of apoA1 and phospholipids by ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 and G1 (ABCA1/ABCG1), forming mature HDL (3). HDL particles are commonly divided into two major subfractions, HDL2 (1.063–1.125 g/ml) and HDL3 (1.125–1.21 g/ml), that differ in apolipoprotein composition and metabolic function (22). HDL2 represents the majority (~85%) of HDL and can be subdivided into apoE-containing and apoE-lacking lipoproteins. HDL particles act as a reservoir for apoE, which can be transferred to chylomicrons and VLDL (2, 22).

2.1.4. Lipid delivery in the periphery.

Lipid uptake into hepatic and extrahepatic cells is mediated by interactions between lipoprotein particles containing apolipoproteins such as apoB or apoE and cell surface receptors, including LDLR family members, scavenger receptors, and heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) (21, 23). The LDLR family contains many receptors such as LDLR, LDLR-related protein 1 (LRP1), VLDL receptor (VLDLR) and apoE receptor 2 (apoER2) (Figure 2) (24).

2.2. Lipoproteins in the Central Nervous System Are Distinct from Lipoproteins in Plasma

Lipid metabolism and composition in the brain are distinct from those in the periphery due to the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Compared to the periphery, the brain is particularly rich in phospholipids, such as sphingolipids and glycerophospholipids, as well as cholesterol (1, 25).

Brain cholesterol is an essential component in brain homeostasis and plays a critical role during pathological events. It is essential for plasma membrane integrity and fluidity, which affect synaptic structure and function (25). Disruption in brain cholesterol homeostasis has been linked to several neurodegenerative disorders, including AD (26). Brain cholesterol is synthesized in situ, originating from two main sources: astrocytes and oligodendrocytes (13, 27). Production of cholesterol by oligodendrocytes is at its highest during brain development in order to form myelin sheaths (27). In the adult brain, cholesterol production is mostly sustained by astrocytes (28), which are uniquely sensitive to fluctuations in intracellular cholesterol levels (29).

Lipoproteins in the CNS play an essential role in trafficking and distributing lipids among different cell types to maintain cholesterol homeostasis. Neurons in the adult brain are inefficient at producing cholesterol, despite relying on this sterol to form and maintain synapses (28). Astrocyte-derived lipoprotein particles deliver cholesterol to neurons via apoE receptors, primarily LRP1, a critical event in neuronal homeostasis, synaptic integrity, and injury repair (Figure 4, step ② (26). When lipoproteins were first detected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), their presence was speculated to be derived from either brain tissue or the blood (30). Notably, we now know the CNS is separated from the periphery by a set of barriers with restricted permeability: the BBB separates the interstitial fluid (ISF) from the circulating blood, and the blood–CSF barrier separates CSF and blood (31). Lipids and lipoproteins in the CNS are thus, for the most part, separated from those of the plasma and have distinct functions.

2.3. Lipoproteins in CSF

The bulk of our knowledge of lipoproteins in the CNS stems from what we have learned from these particles in CSF because it is readily accessible. Animal and in vitro models have also been critical in enhancing our current understanding.

The apolipoprotein profile in human CSF is distinct from that of plasma. Analysis of CSF by denaturing gel electrophoresis showed the most abundant apolipoproteins are apoE and apoA1. Other apolipoproteins are also present, albeit at lower concentrations. Importantly, apoB was not detected in human CSF (8). Fractionation density-gradient ultracentrifugation allowed for the identification of a heterogeneous population of lipoproteins in the ρ (density) &lt; 1.21 g/ml fraction of human CSF (31). Their lipid content, determined by high-performance thin layer chromatography, showed the presence of cholesterol, cholesteryl ester, and phospholipids (phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylcholine, and sphingomyelin) (8). Subsequent analysis of the ρ &lt; 1.21 g/ml human CSF fraction by negative stain transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed the presence of small spherical lipoprotein particles with diameters ranging between 12 and 20 nm (4, 8). As such, CSF lipoproteins are similar in size and density to plasma HDL and are therefore designated as HDL-like despite a greater size range. Negative stain TEM also showed the presence of disc-like particles of ~30 nm, although in a much smaller proportion than the small spherical ones (8).

Analysis of the heterogeneous lipoprotein population in human CSF by immunoaffinity chromatography identified separate classes of lipoproteins differing in apolipoprotein content, lipid content, and size (4, 8). Their complete characterization has yet to be robustly established. More up-to-date technologies and larger sample sizes are necessary to achieve their systematic classification. Overall, studies focused on classifying the heterogeneous lipoprotein subspecies in CSF identify four classes, differing in size (10–22 nm) and composition (4, 8, 32). The most predominant class of lipoproteins (CSF-LpEA, 13–20 nm) contain both apoE and apoA1. The second class (CSF-LpA, 13–18 nm) is devoid of apoE and mostly contains apoA1. Particles of the third class (CSF-LpE) are larger in size (18–22 nm), mainly composed of apoE, and devoid of apoA1. Finally, the smallest, lipid-poor lipoprotein particles (sCSF-Lp, 10–12 nm) are devoid of apoA1 and apoE but contain apoJ (4). Other apolipoproteins such as apoA4, apoD, apoH, and apoJ are distributed among these different classes, albeit at much lower concentrations (Figure 1) (4, 8, 32).

2.4. Lipoprotein Formation in the Central Nervous System

Although apoE and apoJ are the major lipoproteins in brain parenchyma, apoA1 is one of the most abundant apolipoproteins in CSF. However, there is still no evidence of apoA1 production in the brain, and it is likely derived from plasma (8, 33). Nevertheless, most lipoproteins found in CSF originate from production and assembly in the brain. For apoE, this was evidenced in cases of liver transplantation, where the apoE phenotype (isoform status) in the periphery changes to that of the donor, while the recipient’s apoE phenotype persists in the CNS (34). Brain apoE is mainly derived from astrocytes (35), although recent evidence also supports vast upregulation of apoE expression in activated microglia (36). Like apoE, apoJ is also produced primarily by astrocytes in the brain (37).

Astrocytes are recognized as the principal site for CNS lipoprotein formation. In vitro, astrocytes secrete discoidal lipoprotein particles, different from spherical CSF particles, rich in apoE and apoJ (38). The formation of lipoproteins in the CNS is mediated by members of the ABC transporter superfamily, which contains 48 different proteins classified into 7 subgroups (39) (Figure 3, steps ① and ②). These homologous transmembrane proteins use ATP to catalyze phospholipid and cholesterol efflux across membranes (40). ABCA1 is the most studied ABCA subfamily member. In the periphery, ABCA1 is highly produced by hepatocytes and macrophages (41). Its role in facilitating the translocation of lipids to lipid-poor or lipid-free apoA1 during reverse cholesterol transport is well established (42). In the brain, ABCA1 is mostly expressed in neurons (43), as well as in glial cells, albeit at a lower baseline level. ABCA1 expression in astrocytes and microglia is markedly increased following exposure to liver X receptor (LXR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) ligands (44). The role of ABCA1 as a cholesterol and phospholipid transporter in glial cells was first investigated using primary cultures of astrocytes and microglia derived from ABCA1 knockout (KO) mice. ABCA1 deficiency resulted in reduced cholesterol efflux to apoE (45). Consistently, ABCA1 was shown to facilitate cholesterol efflux to both nonlipidated apoE and apoE discs (46). In vivo, Abca1-KO mice exhibited reductions in both apoE levels and its lipidation, resulting in secretion of smaller apoE particles (40). Interestingly, this effect on concentration and lipidation status was restricted to apoE and not observed for apoJ, emphasizing the unique role of ABCA1 in apoE/lipoprotein metabolism (40, 41, 45). The finding that ABCA1 deficiency does not completely abolish apoE lipidation suggests the existence of complementary or compensatory mechanisms.

ABCA7 is another member of the ABCA subfamily, sharing 54% of its sequence with ABCA1 (47). In vitro, ABCA7 was shown to mediate efflux of phospholipids, but not cholesterol, to apoA1 and apoE (48). Brain ABCA7 is mostly expressed in microglia and oligodendrocytes and, to a lesser extent, in neurons and astrocytes (39). In vivo studies have shown that deletion of the Abca7 gene in the mouse brain resulted in disruption of the lipid profile, suggesting a potential role for ABCA7 in brain lipid metabolism (49). Despite limited understanding of its physiological role, ABCA7 has sparked growing interest because single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ABCA7 gene have been linked to AD risk (50). The proposed mechanisms through which ABCA7 may modulate pathogenic pathways in AD are discussed in a later section (4.3. Central Nervous System Lipoproteins and Amyloid Pathology).

ABCG1 is a half-transporter, with its binding cassette restricted to the N-terminal transmembrane region. It is expressed in neurons and astrocytes in the brain (51, 52). In vitro evidence suggests that ABCG1 is involved in cholesterol efflux to lipidated particles such as apoE discs, as opposed to lipid-free apoE (46).

Since astrocyte-secreted lipoproteins differ from those found in the CSF, these nascent particles likely incorporate additional lipids such as cholesteryl esters before reaching the CSF (38). In addition to ABC transporters, enzymes such as lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) and cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) are also primarily synthesized by astrocytes in the brain (2, 53, 54). LCAT esterifies cholesterol on nascent apoE-containing lipoprotein discs (53), yielding mature, spherical lipoprotein particles. The role of CETP in the brain is still poorly defined, but it has been proposed to participate in lipoprotein maturation in the CNS (2) (Figure 3, step ④).

2.5. Lipoprotein Metabolism in the Central Nervous System

Following assembly and maturation, lipoproteins in the CNS can interact with lipoprotein receptors as they do in peripheral tissues.

In the brain, LDLR is expressed in neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, as well as in cells of the arachnoid mater (8, 23) (Figure 4, step ①). ApoE- and apoA1-containing CSF lipoproteins can bind to LDLR, suggesting a role for LDLR in lipoprotein metabolism in the CNS (8). LRP1 is mostly expressed in neurons but also in astrocytes, microglia, and cerebrovascular cells (55, 56) (Figure 4, step ②). The absence of neuronal LRP1 affected brain lipid metabolism in bulk, particularly by decreasing levels of cholesterol, sulfatide, galactosylceramide, and triglycerides (57). Moreover, LRP1 is a highly efficient endocytic receptor with a rapid endocytosis rate and efficient recycling, mediating the metabolism of a variety of ligands in addition to apoE-containing lipoproteins (57, 58). ApoE-containing lipoprotein particles were also shown to bind HSPG, which are abundant on the cell surface of all brain cell types (Figure 4, step ②) (24, 59). Another member of the LDLR family, LRP2, which is expressed in epithelial cells and, to a much lesser extent, neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes in the brain, mediates endocytosis of apoJ (60-64). Differences in cell-specific expression patterns among lipoprotein receptors and ligand-binding specificity suggest that brain lipoprotein metabolism likely depends on lipoprotein content and brain region and/or cell-type-specific environment.

Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) is a single-transmembrane protein implicated in the risk of AD. In the CNS, it is expressed in microglia and modulates their responses to injury or pathology-induced activation (65), as well as their cholesterol metabolism (66) (Figure 4, step ③). TREM2 also mediates myelin debris clearance (Figure 4, step ④). The deletion of TREM2 results in cholesteryl ester accumulation in microglia (66) (Figure 4, step ⑤). Interestingly, TREM2 was shown to be a receptor for lipoprotein particles containing apoE, apoJ, or apoA1 (65) (Figure 4, step ③).

Additional receptors involved in lipid uptake in the brain include scavenger receptor class B type 1 (SR-B1), which facilitates the internalization of apoA1-containing HDL particles that have crossed the BBB in endothelial cells (3). SR-B1 is also involved in cerebrovascular phosphatidylcholine uptake, increasing levels of readily available fatty acids (67). Although they function primarily as signaling receptors, the VLDLR and apoER2 are also well-known apoE receptors expressed in the CNS (3).

3. APOLIPOPROTEINS IN THE BRAIN

3.1. ApoE: The Most Studied Apolipoprotein in the Brain.

ApoE, the most abundant apolipoprotein in the brain, has been extensively studied and received greater recognition since APOE4 is linked to AD risk. This section provides an overview of apoE, from its discovery in the periphery to its production in the brain, and how isoform-specific differences impact its function in the CNS.

3.1.1. Discovery of apoE in the periphery.

ApoE was first discovered in the context of human hyperlipidemia, a group of diseases characterized by the accumulation of abnormally cholesterol-rich VLDL in the plasma (68). These cholesterol-rich particles were identified as chylomicron remnants containing high levels of an arginine-rich protein (68) that had previously been described as a constituent of VLDL (69) and later designated as apoE (70). ApoE was quickly found to be heterogeneous following analysis of VLDL in familial hyperlipoproteinemia type III (HLP-III), a disease associated with premature atherosclerosis. The existence of three APOE gene alleles, ε2, ε3 and ε4, results in six apoE genotypes: APOE2/2, APOE2/3, APOE2/4, APOE3/3, APOE3/4, and APOE4/4 (71). The APOE gene was later identified and mapped to chromosome 19 (72). APOE encodes a 317-amino-acid protein that includes an 18-residue signal peptide (73). Cleavage of the signal sequence and subsequent glycosylation result in mature apoE, a 299-amino-acid glycoprotein of approximately 34 kDa (21).

The frequency of APOE alleles in the general population differs by ethnicity. Nevertheless, APOE3 is the most common allele, followed by APOE4 and then APOE2 (74). A summary of the APOE allele frequencies for African Americans and European Americans is shown in Table 1.

3.1.2. ApoE isoforms differ at two amino acid residues in their primary sequence.

Each apoE isoform, apoE2, apoE3, and apoE4, displays a unique isoelectric focusing point between 5.4 and 6.1. ApoE2 corresponds to the most acidic isoform, followed by apoE3; apoE4 is the most basic isoform (75). This biochemical difference is caused by a Cys-to-Arg interchange at positions 112 and 158. ApoE2 harbors two Cys residues, apoE3 contains Cys-112 and Arg-158, and apoE4 has two Arg residues (76) (Figure 5). In addition to the major apoE isoforms, several rare apoE variants have also been detected in humans. Of particular interest are two mutations identified in apoE3 that protect against AD. ApoE3-Christchurch (apoE3-Ch), corresponding to an Arg-to-Ser mutation at position 136, was recently associated with resistance against autosomal dominant AD in a homozygote carrier (77). ApoE3-Jacksonville, corresponding to a Val-to-Glu mutation at position 236, was linked to a reduced risk of AD (78, 79) (Figure 5). Additional apoE mutations, such as apoE4-L28P and apoE3-R145C, have been associated with lipid disorders and heart disease (80, 81).

There is no X-ray crystal structure of full-length apoE to date due to its highly aggregative nature. Nevertheless, apoE has been characterized at the secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structural levels using different biophysical techniques. ApoE is rich in α-helices in both its lipidated and nonlipidated forms (82, 83). Crystallization of the N-terminal domain of apoE3 isolated from plasma suggested that it is composed of five α-helices, four of which are arranged in an antiparallel, elongated four-helix bundle (84); this result was supported by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy (85). ApoE is formed of two independently folded domains separated by a hinge region (residues 168–205) that can undergo thrombin cleavage. The N-terminal domain (residues 1–167) corresponds to a 22-kDa fragment, and the C-terminal region (residues 206–299) to a 10-kDa peptide (85, 86). Analysis of H-bonds and salt bridges identified domain–domain interactions, particularly between the N-terminal domain and the C-terminal domain of apoE3 (85). Sedimentation equilibrium experiments performed on delipidated apoE isolated from human plasma showed that apoE forms tetramers in aqueous solution, with tetramerization of apoE mediated by the 10-kDa C-terminal fragment (83, 87).

3.1.3. ApoE production in the brain.

Next to the liver, the brain is the second largest production site for apoE (33). Immunocytochemical staining of apoE in rat brains initially ascribed apoE production solely to astrocytes (24). Further studies have shown that apoE is also highly expressed by the choroid plexus, which secretes CSF (88), and in microglia (89), particularly in reactive microglia (88). ApoE expression was also detected in pericytes and oligodendrocytes, albeit to a lesser extent (90, 91). Neurons have also been reported to produce apoE in response to injury (88). Levels of CNS apoE are in part modulated by ABCA1, likely because of its effect on apoE lipidation status, with poorly lipidated apoE more likely to be catabolized (40).

Plasma levels of apoE in humans are isoform dependent (apoE2 &gt; apoE3 &gt; apoE4) (92). ApoE levels in the CNS also appear to be isoform dependent, following the same trend as in plasma (93-95). For instance, in apoE-targeted replacement (TR) mice, in which the Apoe murine gene was replaced by the human gene, apoE2-TR mice have higher levels of apoE, followed by apoE3-TR and then apoE4-TR mice, in brain parenchyma, CSF, and ISF (94, 95). The impact of APOE genotype on apoE abundance in human brain is less evident. In vitro human cell models such as induced-pluripotent stem cells (iPSC)-derived astrocytes and cerebral organoids have shown that APOE4 is associated with lower levels of cellular and secreted apoE when compared to APOE3 (93). However, when assessing apoE abundance in human CSF, results varied with the quantification method used. Levels of CSF apoE were shown to be genotype dependent when quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), where APOE2 was associated with higher, and APOE4 with lower, apoE levels compared to APOE3 (96). This observation was not supported by quantification using mass spectrometry, as no isoform-dependent difference was detected (97). Measurements of apoE levels in human postmortem cortex by ELISA were consistent with iPSC-based in vitro studies (APOE2 &gt; APOE3 &gt; APOE4) (98).

3.1.4. ApoE-containing lipoproteins in the central nervous system are isoform and cell type dependent.

The cellular origin of apoE-containing lipoprotein particles affects their structure and composition. For instance, microglia-produced apoE-containing lipoproteins are poorly lipidated compared to apoE particles secreted by astrocytes isolated from human apoE knockin (KI) mice (89). Whereas astrocytic apoE particles are approximately 15 nm in diameter (38), microglial apoE particles are approximately 8 nm (89). Importantly, apoE is significantly upregulated upon microglial activation (99, 100). This suggests that microglial apoE is more involved in responding to pathogenic events, whereas astrocytic apoE is important for maintaining brain homeostasis.

The nature of apoE-containing lipoprotein particles is also significantly impacted by apoE isoforms in the CNS. APOE2 carriers displayed larger apoE-containing lipoprotein particles compared to APOE3 homozygotes, and APOE4 was associated with smaller particles (101). Moreover, fractionation of CSF samples collected from APOE2/3, APOE3/3, and APOE3/4 individuals showed that apoE2 and apoE3 were associated with formation of denser particles than apoE4 in specific fractions. ApoE2-containing particles are richer in total cholesterol content than particles isolated from E3/E3 individuals, and apoE4-containing particles are poorer. ApoE4 particles also have the lowest phospholipid content (102).

ApoE2 hyperlipidation compared to apoE3 and apoE4 has been demonstrated in mice expressing human apoE isoforms and in in vitro models (103). In a study by Hu et al. (104), adeno-associated virus–mediated overexpression of apoE2 in astrocytes of apoE4-TR mice led to increased size and lipidation of apoE-containing particles, with higher cholesterol content. The opposite was observed with overexpression of apoE4 in apoE4-TR mice. ApoE secreted by primary astrocytes and microglia derived from human APOE KI mice also follows this pattern, with apoE2 producing larger lipoproteins (89). An isoform-dependent effect on lipoprotein size was also observed in iPSC-derived astrocytes, with apoE3 overall forming larger and more cholesterol-rich lipoprotein particles than apoE4 (105).

3.1.5. Structural differences between apoE isoforms result in distinct lipid-binding preferences.

Unilamellar liposome turbidity clearance kinetics by recombinant apoE produced in Escherichia coli suggest that apoE tetramer dissociation into monomers is required prior to binding lipids. As such, differential self-association propensity and stability of apoE isoforms impact their lipid-binding ability (106). In vitro, recombinant, nonlipidated apoE4 has a higher tendency to form aggregates compared to apoE2 and apoE3 (82). Moreover, lipidation protects apoE from forming high molecular weight oligomers (107).

Lipid binding is likely associated with additional structural rearrangements of apoE, as suggested by the NMR structure of apoE3. Hydrophobic residues in the C-terminal region exposed at its surface attract lipids. Lipid binding may result in disruption of interactions between the N- and C-terminal domains (85, 108). A mechanism for lipid binding to apoE was proposed based on experimental and computational observations: A charged lipid molecule would disrupt domain–domain interactions by interfering with salt bridges, resulting in further opening of the gap as the N- and C-terminal domains separate, allowing binding to lipoprotein receptors through the N-terminal domain (108).

3.1.6. Glycosylation and its effects on lipidation.

ApoE is a glycoprotein, with posttranslational O-glycosylation through galactosylation and subsequent sialylation (109, 110). Thr-194 in the hinge region of apoE was the first residue identified as an O-glycosylation site (110). Mass spectrometry identified additional major and minor glycosylation sites in both the N-terminal (Thr-8, Thr-18) and C-terminal (Thr-289, Ser-290) domains (111, 112) (Figure 5). The extent of apoE glycosylation and its glycosylation patterns are dependent on its source. ApoE glycoproteomic analyses showed CSF apoE to be more heavily glycosylated than plasma apoE. Furthermore, CSF apoE was more sialylated than plasma apoE in its C-terminal domain, whereas the N-terminal domain of plasma apoE was more sialylated compared to its CSF counterpart (111).

Posttranslational modifications modulate biological functions in proteins. Examination of CSF-derived apoE-lipoprotein particles showed an inverse correlation between the extent of apoE sialylation and total lipid concentrations. This suggests that heavier sialylation of apoE results in lipid-poor particle formation (113). How apoE glycosylation patterns affect its lipidation and whether there are isoform-dependent effects on glycosylation and related functions require more in-depth studies to determine.

3.1.7. Isoform-dependent and lipidation-dependent receptor binding.

The receptor-binding domain of apoE is contained within a region rich in basic amino acids in the N terminus of the protein that spans residues 136–150 (84, 114). Binding of apoE to receptors is isoform and lipidation dependent (103). Lipidation of apoE has been proposed to enhance binding to LDLR due to exposure of the receptor-binding region (108). However, lipidation of apoE does not seem to be necessary for binding to other receptors such as LRP1, VLDLR, or HSPGs (103).

Defective binding of apoE2 to LDLR is linked to familial HLP-III. This deficiency is due to Cys-158 in apoE2; cysteamine treatment resulting in the generation of a Lys analogue enhanced the affinity of apoE2 for LDLR in fibroblasts to levels similar to apoE3 and apoE4 (115). Residue 136 also seems to affect apoE binding to LDLR, with the Arg-to-Ser mutation in apoE3-Ch resulting in a 60% reduction in affinity for LDLR, consistent with the involvement of basic amino acids in receptor binding (114). Binding of lipidated apoE2 to LRP1 in vitro is also impaired when compared to apoE3 and apoE4 (40% of apoE3 binding) (116). Binding to heparin and HSPGs is mediated by amino acids 142–147 in the N-terminal domain and residues around Lys-233 in the C terminus (117). The affinity of apoE for heparin is also isoform dependent; Cys-158 in apoE2 reduces its affinity for heparin by 40% compared to apoE3 (118), whereas apoE4 has higher affinity. Additionally, Ser-136 in apoE3-Ch recombinantly produced in bacteria impairs heparin binding to 10% of apoE3 binding (77). ApoE is also a ligand for TREM2, but binding appears to be isoform independent (119).

3.1.8. ApoE isoform-dependent lipid efflux, lipid droplets, and lipid metabolism.

Accumulating evidence demonstrates a role for apoE in promoting lipid efflux. In rat primary astrocytes and neuronal cultures, apoE-mediated lipid efflux appears to be isoform dependent. Addition of recombinant apoE led to cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine efflux to a greater extent in the presence of apoE2, followed by apoE3 and then apoE4 (120). ApoE3 dimerization through disulfide bridge formation, which apoE4 cannot achieve without a Cys residue, appeared to further enhance lipid efflux (121).

Lipid efflux capacity is also isoform dependent. APOE4 iPSC-derived astrocytes accumulate cholesterol intracellularly while concomitantly increasing de novo cholesterol synthesis and secretion compared to APOE3 astrocytes (93). APOE4 in astrocytes is also associated with increased formation and accumulation of lipid droplets compared to APOE3 astrocytes. Lipid droplets are intracellular, lipid-rich organelles that sequester cytotoxic fatty acids and serve as a reservoir for cholesterol by entrapping it as cholesteryl esters. Lipid droplets have been shown to over accumulate during aging and in several disorders, including AD (122). For instance, lipid droplets build up in a subset of aged microglia designated as lipid-droplet-accumulating microglia (LDAM) (Figure 4, step ⑤). LDAM are characterized by defective phagocytosis, as well as enhanced oxidative stress and proinflammatory status, which could contribute to neurodegeneration (123).

APOE4 is associated with numerous cell-type-specific transcriptomic variations compared to APOE3. A comparison between the APOE3 and APOE4 transcriptomes in astrocytes identified over 1,000 differentially expressed genes linked to lipid metabolism and transport, further supporting the differential involvement of apoE isoforms in lipid homeostasis (93).

3.1.9. Neurite outgrowth, neuronal survival, and synaptic integrity and function.

Neuronal uptake of apoE lipoprotein particles via apoE receptors is critical to brain homeostasis, synaptic integrity, and synaptic function. For instance, apoE isoforms differentially modulate neurite outgrowth of mouse cortical neurons, with apoE3 promoting and apoE4 diminishing neurite extension (124). This effect was shown to be LRP1 dependent (124). The same effect has been reported using different cell models, including neuronal cell lines and primary hippocampal cultures (125, 126). In vivo, young apoE3-TR mice exhibit enhanced neuronal dendritic arborization, more complex dendritic branching patterns, and overall higher total dendritic length in the lateral amygdala compared to apoE4-TR mice (127). Differences in spine morphology were also observed in the cortex of 4-week-old apoE-TR mice, with apoE2-TR animals displaying significantly longer spines compared to apoE3-TR and apoE4-TR mice (128).

ApoE-containing lipoproteins also differentially participate in maintaining synaptic integrity and in supporting synaptic function. In vitro, coculturing APOE3/3 iPSC-derived neurons with APOE3/3 iPSC-derived astrocytes leads to an increase in the expression of synaptic proteins such as PSD95 and vGlut1, significantly more than that observed in cocultures with APOE4/4 iPSC-derived astrocytes (105). Interestingly, synaptic deficits have been reported in apoE4-TR mice compared to apoE3-mice, with apoE4-TR mice displaying decreased excitatory transmission in the lateral amygdala (127).

ApoE was also shown to impact neuronal viability. Addition of apoE-containing lipoproteins to rat retinal ganglion cells improved neuronal survival when cultured under growth factor–free conditions, through a mechanism dependent on LRP1. ApoE4-containing lipoproteins were less efficient in protecting against neuronal apoptosis than apoE3-containing particles (10). More recently, this effect was also reported in human iPSC-derived neurons cultured in growth factor–free medium. Cocultures of neurons with APOE3/3 iPSC-derived astrocytes led to significantly improved neuronal survival compared to coculture with APOE4/4 astrocytes (105).

3.1.10. Immune responses.

The APOE genotype has also been linked to differential effects on immune function. For instance, microglial cultures established from apoE4-TR mice respond to immune stimulation by producing an increased amount of nitric oxide and cytokines compared to those from apoE3-TR mice (129). Reports on the effect of apoE2 on microglial activation have been more controversial, with some studies reporting no difference (130) or a reduced response (131) compared to apoE3. Transcriptomic analysis in iPSC-derived microglia indicated that the major differences between APOE4 and APOE3 pertain to the immune response–related genes, providing further clues for potentially altered immune responses associated with APOE4 (93).

3.2. ApoJ: An Atypical Apolipoprotein

ApoJ is the second major apolipoprotein in the brain with its gene, CLU, also linked to AD risk. This section provides an overview of its discovery, its structure, as well as the role of brain-derived apoJ-containing lipoprotein particles in lipid transport in the CNS.

3.2.1. Discovery of apoJ.

ApoJ, also known as clusterin, is an acidic glycoprotein first isolated and purified from ram rete testis fluid (132). It is also referred to as an extracellular chaperone because of its function in preventing aggregation of nonnative proteins (133). ApoJ has been isolated in a wide range of tissue and fluids in the brain and periphery, highlighting its complexity and multifunctionality in various biological pathways (134). It is encoded by a highly conserved gene, CLU, localized to chromosome 8 in humans (134, 135).

3.2.2. Structure of apoJ.

The crystal structure of purified apoJ has been only partially elucidated. ApoJ is a heterodimer of a ~70-kDa glycoprotein originating from a 58-kDa precursor protein (136). The apoJ precursor protein is first N-glycosylated with high-mannose oligosaccharide and sialic acid moieties. Proteolytic cleavage prior to secretion generates two separate subunits, apoJα (34–36 kDa) and apoJβ (36–39 kDa) (137). Both subunits contain five Cys residues through which disulfide bonds are formed to yield mature apoJ (138). Human apoJ purified from plasma contains α-helices, β-sheets, and random coils in both its lipidated and nonlipidated forms (139). Further characterization of its secondary structure has postulated the presence of both lipid-binding and heparin-binding domains in apoJ (138). Recent data suggest that the apoJ–heparin interaction may serve as a protein quality control system for preserving extracellular proteostasis (140).

3.2.3. Production in the brain.

Distribution of apoJ mRNA in human tissue revealed that apoJ is widely expressed in several peripheral tissues as well as in the brain (138). In addition, secreted apoJ was detected in a wide range of peripheral fluids including breast milk, plasma, and CSF (138, 141, 142).

In the human brain, apoJ mRNA was detected in astrocytes within the hippocampus (37). In situ hybridization studies in adult rat brain showed that apoJ mRNA was also detected in a subset of hippocampal neurons. Despite high levels of apoJ mRNA in astrocytes, apoJ was predominantly detected in neurons, suggesting potential posttranscriptional regulation events such as protein turnover, secretion, and trafficking (37). Further analysis of apoJ mRNA profiles in vitro showed that mouse primary neurons and astrocytes exhibit distinct apoJ mRNA profiles, resulting in different cell-type-specific and organelle-specific apoJ isoforms. The differential functions of these various isoforms remain unclear; however, a nuclear isoform has been suggested to regulate apoptosis (143).

3.2.4. ApoJ-containing lipoproteins in the central nervous system.

ApoJ-containing lipoproteins were first isolated from human plasma (141). Characterization of apoJ-containing particles revealed that apoJ is associated with lipid-poor, protein-rich apoA1-containing HDL, as well as other plasma lipoproteins (141, 144-146). Consistent with this observation, apoJ-containing lipoproteins have a diameter from 5 to 16 nm, as shown by negative stain TEM (141).

Different distribution patterns of apoJ in human CSF lipoprotein particles have been reported. ApoJ was initially reported as being uniformly distributed across CSF lipoproteins of varying sizes (38). However, CSF fractionation by density ultracentrifugation followed by immunoblotting showed that the majority of apoJ in CSF is found in a fraction similar in size to plasma very-high-density lipoproteins (147). CSF fractionation by anti-apoA1 and anti-apoE immunoaffinity chromatography showed that apoJ is associated with both apoA1-containing and apoE-containing lipoprotein particles, as well as with particles containing neither apoA1 nor apoE and as free protein (38, 142).

Rat primary astrocytes secrete apoJ in the form of discoidal lipoproteins devoid of a cholesteryl ester core, suggesting that astrocyte-secreted apoJ-containing particles acquire additional lipids before reaching CSF (38). Additionally, cultured astrocytes from WT, Apoe-KO, and apoE-TR mice all secreted apoJ-containing particles comparable in size, suggesting that apoE does not alter the astrocytic lipidation of apoJ (148). ApoJ secreted from primary astrocytes from apoE-TR mice is relatively lipid poor compared to secreted apoE, with a protein-to-lipid ratio of three to one (149).

3.2.5. Role of ApoJ in lipid transport in the central nervous system.

Numerous functional properties have been attributed to apoJ, in both physiological and pathological conditions. For instance, apoJ has a role in innate immune responses as an inhibitor of the complement system (150). It also acts as an extracellular chaperone with increased expression in response to cellular stress (151) and displays antiapoptotic properties (152). Roles for apoJ in lipid transport and redistribution, as well as in reverse cholesterol transport, have been suggested in the periphery (141, 144), given that apoJ was identified as a minor component of lipoproteins (141, 145, 146) and that apoJ-containing lipoprotein particles in plasma display cholesteryl ester transferase activity (141). However, these functions remain poorly characterized to date.

Little is known about apoJ and its role in lipid and cholesterol transport in the brain. ApoJ binds to several receptors in the brain that belong to the LDLR family, such as LRP1, LRP2, VLDLR, and ApoER2 (153), suggesting a potential role for apoJ in lipid trafficking in the CNS. ApoJ binds LRP2 with high affinity (62). LRP2, also known as megalin, is a transmembrane protein expressed in epithelial cells of ventricular ependyma, capillaries, and choroid plexus (61, 62). LRP2 mediates apoJ endocytosis (62); however, it is still unclear whether apoJ facilitates lipid transport and distribution in the brain and whether receptor-mediated endocytosis or transcytosis plays a role in this process. Lipidated apoJ, but not delipidated apoJ, is also a ligand for TREM2, suggesting a role for apoJ-mediated lipid-related function in microglia (65).

3.3. Other Central Nervous System Apolipoproteins

In addition to apoE and apoJ, there are other apolipoproteins in the CNS such as apoA1 and apoD. While there is evidence for production of apoD in the brain, apoA1 likely originates from periphery.

3.3.1. ApoA1.

Lipoproteins isolated from CSF are rich in apoA1, which is one of the most abundant apolipoproteins in the CSF. Since its expression has been ascribed to the liver and intestines, it is believed that the presence of apoA1 in the CNS originates from the periphery (4). For instance, knocking down Apoa1 in both intestine and liver in mice drastically reduces HDL cholesterol in plasma and results in a lack of apoA1 in CSF (154). Injection of fluorescently labeled human apoA1 intravenously in mice showed that it can enter the CNS via the choroid plexus. ApoA1 can also be taken up by human epithelial and endothelial cells in in vitro models of the BBB (155). The exact roles of apoA1 in brain homeostasis and pathogenic events require further investigation.

3.3.2. ApoD.

ApoD is one of the few apolipoproteins synthesized in the brain and is produced by astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. However, despite belonging to the apolipoprotein family, it is structurally closer to proteins from the lipocalin family and does not appear to be involved in the synthesis of nascent lipoprotein particles. Nevertheless, apoD is capable of binding lipids, but its role in lipoprotein metabolism in the CNS is unclear (7).

3.3.3. Other apolipoproteins in the brain.

Additional apolipoproteins such as apoA2, apoA4, apoC, and apoH have been detected in the brain. Their origin and role in lipoprotein metabolism in the CNS remain unclear to date (7).

4. LIPOPROTEINS AND APOLIPOPROTEINS IN ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE

4.1. Alzheimer’s Disease

AD is the primary cause of dementia in the elderly. Pathologically, AD is characterized by the presence of extracellular deposition of amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques and the intracellular deposition of neurofibrillary tau tangles (156, 157). Sporadic, late-onset AD (LOAD) accounts for the vast majority of cases and typically develops later in life, after the age of 65 (158). Genes linked to AD risk can be classified into three broad categories: lipid and cholesterol metabolism; endocytosis and vesicle-mediated transport; and immune response (159, 160). APOE, CLU, and ABCA7 are among the top-ranked risk genes and are involved in lipid and cholesterol metabolism, although they have individual roles in other pathways.

4.2. APOE, CLU, ABCA7, and Other Risk Factors Associated with Lipoprotein Metabolism

APOE is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD. APOE4 increases AD risk compared to the common APOE3 allele, while APOE2 is protective (5, 161). APOE4 copy number impacts both age and risk of AD onset. ApoE4 in AD has been linked to numerous pathogenic pathways through both gain of toxic function and loss of neuroprotective function, either dependent or independent of Aβ pathology (162). CLU is the third strongest genetic risk factor for LOAD, with multiple SNPs identified as susceptibility loci. ApoJ is upregulated in AD in both the brain and CSF, and it appears to contribute to AD by affecting amyloid pathology (163). Susceptibility loci for LOAD in ABCA7 are mostly loss-of-function variants. Dysfunction and reduction of ABCA7 promote amyloid pathology and neuroinflammation (164). Part of the risk associated with SNPs in APOE, CLU, and ABCA7 in AD onset directly stems from altered functions in brain lipoprotein metabolism. AD risk has also been linked to other genes involved in lipoprotein metabolism, such as ABCA1 and APOA1 (7, 165).

4.3. Central Nervous System Lipoproteins and Amyloid Pathology

The extent of amyloid deposition in the AD brain is dependent on APOE genotype. APOE2 is associated with lower and APOE4 with higher amounts of amyloid plaques (166). Evidence that APOE4 dominantly drives earlier and more abundant amyloid pathology has been demonstrated in both animal models and humans. Aβ in human CSF is associated with HDL-like lipoprotein particles that contain apoE and apoJ (167), suggesting that both proteins interact with Aβ in vivo. ApoE-Aβ complexes have been isolated from AD brain tissue (168). In vitro studies have shown that the interaction between apoE and Aβ is isoform and lipidation status dependent. Lipid-free apoE forms apoE-Aβ complexes more readily with apoE4 than with apoE3 (5). Contrarily, the efficiency of apoE-Aβ interaction with lipidated apoE follows the order apoE2 &gt; apoE3 ≫ apoE4 (169). As such, apoE lipidation status likely influences its specific role in Aβ clearance (lipidated form) and aggregation (non- or poorly lipidated form).

ApoE and apoJ are both found in amyloid plaques in AD brain tissue (170, 171), implicating both apolipoproteins in Aβ aggregation and deposition in the brain. Lack of apoE in PDAPP amyloid model mice resulted in substantial reduction of Aβ aggregates, particularly the fibrillar form in the brain (172), suggesting an essential role for apoE in amyloid seeding. Similarly, deficiency of apoJ in PDAPP mice led to a reduction of amyloid deposition (173). As apoE and apoJ found in amyloid plaques are not lipidated, it is unclear whether these plaque-associated apolipoproteins are not lipidated to begin with or their associated lipids are lost in the process of amyloid development. Interestingly, targeting nonlipidated apoE with a specific antibody reduced Aβ deposition in 5xFAD amyloid model mice expressing apoE4 (174).

Brain apoE- and apoJ-containing lipoproteins have been postulated to play an active role in receptor-mediated Aβ clearance (175). Like apoE, apoJ also forms complexes with Aβ in the CNS (176), and apoJ may accelerate the clearance of Aβ from brain ISF across the BBB through LRP2-mediated endocytosis (175). Moreover, overexpression of apoJ in astrocytes has been shown to reduce amyloid pathology in mouse models (177, 178). The role of apoE in clearing soluble Aβ is isoform dependent and therefore involves different receptors depending on the nature of the apoE–Aβ complex formed. Overall, apoE4 is associated with a greater retention of Aβ in the brain (179). Aβ clearance from the brain is also partially mediated by cellular uptake and degradation. Aβ uptake by microglia is facilitated by TREM2, and both apoE and apoJ are TREM2 ligands. Microglial uptake of apoJ-Aβ complexes is partially dependent on TREM2 since loss of TREM2 strongly reduces its internalization (65). Microglial degradation of Aβ is also dependent on apoE since knocking it down results in increased intracellular levels of Aβ. This effect is isoform dependent, with apoE2 being the most efficient and apoE4 least efficient at promoting Aβ degradation by microglia. Lipidation status also affects this degradation pathway, with lipidation significantly improving degradation of Aβ (180). ABCA7 has also been shown to play a role in regulating phagocytosis of Aβ aggregates in microglia, thus contributing to Aβ degradation in the brain (164).

4.4. Central Nervous System Lipoproteins and Amyloid-Independent Pathogenic Pathways

The amyloid-independent effects of apoE isoforms on tau pathology, synaptic failure, neuroinflammation, and vascular and mixed pathologies (103) likely relate to their differential properties in aggregation, lipidation, levels, and efficiency in lipid transport, thus affecting neuroprotection, synaptic function, and immune responses (181). ApoJ has also been shown to affect synaptic transmission in amyloid model mice (177).

By exerting neurotrophic functions, apoE-containing lipoproteins can provide protection against neurodegeneration in AD, most likely by delivering necessary lipids and cholesterol. For instance, astrocyte-secreted apoE-containing lipoproteins protect neurons against apoptosis through a mechanism mediated by LRP1, with apoE3 lipoproteins having a greater effect than apoE4-containing lipoproteins (10). The interaction between apoE-containing lipoproteins and LRP1 also promotes the cellular uptake of lipids and cholesterol necessary to support synaptogenesis, synaptic plasticity, neuronal viability, and injury repair (29). The decreased neurotrophic effect of apoE4 could in part impact the severity of AD associated with APOE4-related risk. For instance, APOE4 in cerebral organoids derived from AD patients exacerbates apoptosis and synaptic loss, as well as tau pathology (182). Moreover, selective depletion of apoE4 in astrocytes, as well as apoE4 reduction using antisense oligonucleotides in tauopathy mice, decreased tau pathology and associated neurodegeneration (183, 184). Interestingly, APOE2 enhances tau pathology in primary tauopathies such as progressive supranuclear palsy (185).

An emerging function of apoE is related to microglia. Upregulation of apoE in disease-associated microglia surrounding amyloid plaques has been reported in both human AD brains and amyloid model mice (103). In this context, apoE4 might exhibit a loss of function in promoting a transition of microglia to an activated state to control amyloid development and toxicity. However, apoE4 gain of toxic effects through promoting proinflammatory responses in microglia have also been reported in a tau-mediated neurodegeneration mouse model (130).

4.5. Enhancing ApoE Lipidation as a Therapy for Alzheimer’s Disease

ABCA1 plays a critical role in the formation of CNS lipoprotein particles (40). Interestingly, overexpressing ABCA1 in PDAPP amyloid mice increased lipidation of apoE-containing particles and reduced Aβ deposition (186). Given how the differential lipidation status of apoE likely affects Aβ-dependent and independent pathways, increasing apoE lipidation is one of the most attractive therapeutic avenues in AD (187).

RXR and retinoic acid receptor agonists, retinoic acid isomers, led to increased levels of ABCA1 and ABCG1, thus enhancing apoE lipidation (188). The RXR agonist bexarotene is an FDA-approved anticancer drug that was reported to reduce amyloid pathology in mice; however, the early results for the most part were not reproduced by follow up studies. Further, a major side effect of the drug, hepatomegaly, could be detrimental when treating the elderly (189). LXR agonists such as TO901317 also increase ABCA1 and apoE levels, as well as ABCA1-induced apoE lipidation. Additionally, TO901317 facilitates the clearance of Aβ42 and ameliorates contextual memory deficits in APP transgenic mice (190, 191).

In addition to inducing apoE lipidation, other apoE-targeted therapies in AD include modulation of apoE levels, apoE peptide mimetics, apoE immunotherapy, and APOE gene therapy to convert APOE4 to APOE3, APOE2, or one of its protective variants (192). Whether increasing apoJ lipidation could be achieved in therapy has not been explored.

5. CONCLUSION

Our understanding of the structure, composition, and function of CNS lipoproteins has greatly improved since their first observation in CSF in 1961. Originating primarily from glial cells, nascent discoidal lipoprotein particles undergo maturation to form spherical particles composed of phospholipids, cholesterol, and apolipoproteins surrounding a cholesteryl ester core. CNS lipoprotein metabolism via interaction with lipoprotein receptors plays key roles in aspects of brain homeostasis such as synaptic plasticity and maintenance. CNS apolipoproteins, in particular apoE, also play a pathogenic role in neurological disorders like AD through lipid-dependent and -independent mechanisms. However, many unknowns remain about CNS lipoproteins. Further investigation of how cell origin and individual apolipoproteins affect the structure, composition, and ultimately function of lipoproteins in the CNS is needed. Moreover, understanding disease-associated changes in lipoprotein particles may help identify new biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

There are several other gaps in our knowledge and opportunities for uncovering how differential lipoprotein metabolism may result in altered lipid profiles and lipid accumulation in the brain. Lipid droplets are increasingly sparking interest in the field of neurodegeneration and aging. Where and how they come to accumulate, whether this accumulation is APOE dependent, and whether lipid droplets can be targeted if pathogenic is currently under investigation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Work in the Bu Lab related to APOE, TREM2, and lipoproteins in CNS is supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (R37AG027924, RF1AG046205, RF1AG057181, R01AG066395, U19AG069701) and Cure Alzheimer’s Fund. A-C.R. is supported by a BrightFocus Fellowship. We also thank Dr. Na Zhao, Dr. Sydney Doss, Dr. Hongmei Li, Dr. Takahisa Kanekiyo, Ms. Francis Shue, Ms. Lindsey Kuchenbecker, and Mr. Justin O’Leary, as well as other members of the Bu Lab, for helpful discussions and editing.

Figure 1 Lipoproteins in the periphery and in CSF. Lipoproteins in the periphery can be divided into four main classes (chylomicrons, VLDL, LDL, and HDL) that differ in size, density, and composition, with a varying P:L ratio. Apolipoproteins found in the periphery include apoE, apoB-48, apoB-100, apoA1, apoA2, apoC, and apoD. Major apolipoproteins in each particle are indicated in bold. Lipoproteins found in CSF are HDL-like in size and density and have a different composition than lipoproteins in the periphery. Lipoproteins in CSF have a higher apolipoprotein content; apoE and apoA1 are the major apolipoprotein components, but they also include lower amounts of apoJ, apoA2, apoA4, apoD, and/or apoH. Apolipoproteins listed in CSF particles do not necessarily exist in the same particles (see 2.3. Lipoproteins in CSF for detail. Abbreviations: apo, apolipoprotein; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein; P:L ratio, protein to lipid ratio.

Figure 2 Lipoprotein receptors in the brain. LDLR, LRP1, APOER2, VLDLR, LRP2, and LRP5/LRP6 are members of the LDL receptor family and fulfil different functions in the brain. LRP1 and LDLR are the two major metabolic receptors for apoE in the brain. APOER2 and VLDLR are primarily apoE signaling receptors. LRP2 is a major receptor that binds apoJ. LRP5/LRP6 are coreceptors for canonical Wnt signaling. Abbreviations: apo, apolipoprotein; LDLR, low-density lipoprotein receptor; LRP, LDLR-related protein; APOER2, apoE receptor 2; VLDLR, very-low-density lipoprotein receptor. Figure adapted and redrew based on Bu, 2009 (23).

Figure 3 Lipoprotein formation in the brain. The formation of lipoproteins in the brain is mediated by members of the ABC transporter superfamily, including ABCA1, ABCG1, and ABCA7. ABC transporters catalyze the efflux of phospholipids to apoE (1). They also regulate cholesterol efflux to nascent apoE discs (2). Incorporation of cholesteryl esters that make up the dense hydrophobic core in spherical apoE-containing lipoprotein particles is likely mediated by enzymes such as LCAT or CETP (3), both of which are expressed in the brain. Abbreviations: ABC, ATP-binding cassette; apo, apolipoprotein; CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; LCAT, lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase.

Figure 4 Lipoprotein metabolism and function in the CNS. Lipoprotein particles in the CNS are secreted primarily by astrocytes and, to a lesser extent, by microglia. Lipoproteins exert different functions through binding to LDL receptor family members (1). In particular, binding of lipoproteins to LRP1 in neurons promotes neuronal homeostasis, synaptogenesis, neurite outgrowth, and injury repair (2). Lipoproteins are also ligands for other receptors, such as TREM2, which activates downstream signaling pathways in microglia through the adapter protein DAP12 (3). Microglia play an important role in lipid homeostasis in the brain, including myelin remodeling and repair (4). Age- and disease-status-dependent accumulation of lipid droplets in microglia and in other brain cell types have been reported (5). For different types of lipoprotein particles, see Figure 1. Abbreviations: CNS, central nervous system; HSPG, heparan sulfate proteoglycan; LDLR, low-density lipoprotein receptor; LRP, LDLR-related protein; TREM2; triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2.

Figure 5 Structure of apoE. Mature apoE, the major apolipoprotein in the brain, is a 299-amino-acid glycoprotein formed of two independently folded domains separated by a hinge region. The N-terminal domain (residues 1–167) includes the receptor-binding region (residues 136–150). Within this region, residues 142–147 constitute one of two heparin-binding domains. The second heparin-binding domain encompasses basic residues at positions 213–217. The C-terminal domain harbors the lipid-binding region of apoE (residues 244–272). Single amino acid substitutions at positions 112 and 158 give rise to three major apoE isoforms: apoE2 (Cys, Cys), apoE3 (Cys, Arg), and apoE4 (Arg, Arg). Other rare variants include apoE3-Christchurch (Arg-to-Ser substitution at position 136) and apoE3-Jacksonville (Val-to-Glu substitution at position 236). ApoE is heavily glycosylated, with major O-glycosylation sites on Thr at positions 8, 18, 194, and 289 and Ser at position 290. Abbreviation: apo, apolipoprotein.

Table 1 APOE genotype frequency in Americans showing different frequencies in different ethnic backgrounds (193).

APOE genotype	African Americans	European Americans	
APOE2/APOE2	0.7%	0.2%	
APOE2/APOE3	15.1%	10.2%	
APOE2/APOE4	5.7%	2.4%	
APOE3/APOE3	45.2%	63.4%	
APOE3/APOE4	28.6%	21.4%	
APOE4/APOE4	4.5%	2.4%	

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

G.B. consults for SciNeuro and Vida Ventures, previously consulted for AbbVie, E-Scape, and Eisai, and serves as a Co-Editor-in-Chief for Molecular Neurodegeneration. The other authors are not aware of any affiliations, memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review..


LITERATURE CITED

1. Sastry PS . 1985. Lipids of nervous tissue: composition and metabolism. Prog. Lipid Res 24 :69–176 3916238
2. Mahley RW . 2016. Central nervous system lipoproteins: ApoE and regulation of cholesterol metabolism. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vase. Biol 36 :1305–15
3. Wang H , Eckel RH . 2014. What are lipoproteins doing in the brain? Trends Endocrinol. Metab 25 :8–14 24189266
4. Koch S , Donarski N , Goetze K , Kreckel M , Stuerenburg HJ , 2001. Characterization of four lipoprotein classes in human cerebrospinal fluid. J. Lipid Res 42 :1143–51 11441143
5. Strittmatter WJ , Saunders AM , Schmechel D , Pericak-Vance M , Enghild J , 1993. Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease. PNAS 90 :1977–81 8446617
6. Beisiegel U , Spector AA . 2001. Lipids and lipoproteins in the brain. Curr. Opin. Lipidol 12 :243–44 11353325
7. Elliott DA , Weickert CS , Garner B . 2010. Apolipoproteins in the brain: implications for neurological and psychiatric disorders. Clin. Lipidol 51 :555–73 21423873
8. Pitas RE , Boyles JK , Lee SH , Hui D , Weisgraber KH . 1987. Lipoproteins and their receptors in the central nervous system. Characterization of the lipoproteins in cerebrospinal fluid and identification of apolipoprotein B,E(LDL) receptors in the brain. J. Biol. Chem 262 :14352–60 3115992
9. Mauch DH , Nagler K , Schumacher S , Goritz C , Muller EC , 2001. CNS synaptogenesis promoted by glia-derived cholesterol. Science 294 :1354–57 11701931
10. Hayashi H , Campenot RB , Vance DE , Vance JE . 2007. Apolipoprotein E-containing lipoproteins protect neurons from apoptosis via a signaling pathway involving low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1. J. Neurosci. 27 :1933–41 17314289
11. Feingold KR . 2000. Introduction to Lipids and Lipoproteins. In Endotext, ed. Feingold KR , Anawalt B , Boyce A , Chrousos G , de Herder WW , South Dartmouth, MA: MDText.com, Inc.
12. Jurevics H , Morell P . 1995. Cholesterol for synthesis of myelin is made locally, not imported into brain. J. Neurochem 64 :895–901 7830084
13. Dietschy JM , Turley SD . 2001. Cholesterol metabolism in the brain. Curr. Opin. Lipidol 12 :105–12 11264981
14. Steck TL , Lange Y . 2010. Cell cholesterol homeostasis: mediation by active cholesterol. Trends Cell Biol. 20 :680–87 20843692
15. Roca-Agujetas V , Barbero-Camps E , de Dios C , Podlesniy P , Abadin X , 2021. Cholesterol alters mitophagy by impairing optineurin recruitment and lysosomal clearance in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 16 :15 33685483
16. Shao Y , Li T , Liu Z , Wang X , Xu X , 2021. Comprehensive metabolic profiling of Parkinson’s disease by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Mol. Neurodegener 16 :4 33485385
17. Loving BA , Bruce KD . 2020. Lipid and lipoprotein metabolism in microglia. Front. Physiol 11 :393 32411016
18. Bahrami A , Barreto GE , Lombardi G , Pirro M , Sahebkar A . 2019. Emerging roles for high-density lipoproteins in neurodegenerative disorders. BioFactors 45 :725–39 31301192
19. Mahley RW , Innerarity TL , Rail SC Jr. , Weisgraber KH . 1984. Plasma lipoproteins: apolipoprotein structure and function. J. Lipid Res 25 :1277–94 6099394
20. Havel RJ , Yamada N , Shames DM . 1987. Role of apolipoprotein E in lipoprotein metabolism. Am. Heart J 113 :470–74 3544762
21. Mahley RW . 1988. Apolipoprotein E: cholesterol transport protein with expanding role in cell biology. Science 240 :622–30 3283935
22. Weisgraber KH , Mahley RW . 1980. Subfractionation of human high density lipoproteins by heparin-sepharose affinity chromatography. J. Lipid Res 21 :316–25 7381326
23. Bu G 2009. Apolipoprotein E and its receptors in Alzheimer’s disease: pathways, pathogenesis and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurosci 10 :333–44 19339974
24. Zhao N , Liu C-C , Qiao W , Bu G . 2018. Apolipoprotein E, receptors, and modulation of Alzheimer’s disease. Biol. Psychiatry 83 :347–57 28434655
25. Zhang J , Liu Q . 2015. Cholesterol metabolism and homeostasis in the brain. Protein Cell 6 :254–64 25682154
26. Vance JE . 2012. Dysregulation of cholesterol balance in the brain: contribution to neurodegenerative diseases. Dis. Model. Mech 5 :746–55 23065638
27. Quan G , Xie C , Dietschy JM , Turley SD . 2003. Ontogenesis and regulation of cholesterol metabolism in the central nervous system of the mouse. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res 146 :87–98 14643015
28. Nieweg K , Schaller H , Pfrieger FW . 2009. Marked differences in cholesterol synthesis between neurons and glial cells from postnatal rats. J. Neurochem 109 :125–34 19166509
29. Lanfranco MF , Ng CA , Rebeck GW . 2020. ApoE lipidation as a therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci 21 :6336
30. Swahn B , Brönnestam R , Dencker SJ . 1961. On the origin of the lipoproteins in the cerebrospinal fluid. Neurology 11 :437–40
31. Roheim PS , Carey M , Forte T , Vega GL . 1979. Apolipoproteins in human cerebrospinal fluid. PNAS 76 :4646–49 291993
32. Koch M , Furtado JD , Falk K , Leypoldt F , Mukamal KJ , Jensen MK . 2017. Apolipoproteins and their subspecies in human cerebrospinal fluid and plasma. Alzheimer’s Dementia 6 :182–87
33. Elshourbagy NA , Liao WS , Mahley RW , Taylor JM . 1985. Apolipoprotein E mRNA is abundant in the brain and adrenals, as well as in the liver, and is present in other peripheral tissues of rats and marmosets. PNAS 82 :203–7 3918303
34. Linton MF , Gish R , Hubl ST , Butler E , Esquivel C , 1991. Phenotypes of apolipoprotein B and apolipoprotein E after liver transplantation. J. Clin. Investig 88 :270–81 2056122
35. Boyles JK , Pitas RE , Wilson E , Mahley RW , Taylor JM . 1985. Apolipoprotein E associated with astrocytic glia of the central nervous system and with nonmyelinating glia of the peripheral nervous system. J. Clin. Investig 76 :1501–13 3932467
36. Kang SS , Ebbert MTW , Baker KE , Cook C , Wang X , 2018. Microglial translational profiling reveals a convergent APOE pathway from aging, amyloid, and tau. J. Exp. Med 215 :2235–45 30082275
37. Pasinetti GM , Johnson SA , Oda T , Rozovsky I , Finch CE . 1994. Clusterin (SGP-2): a multifunctional glycoprotein with regional expression in astrocytes and neurons of the adult rat brain. J. Comp. Neurol 339 :387–400 8132868
38. LaDu MJ , Gilligan SM , Lukens JR , Cabana VG , Reardon CA , 1998. Nascent astrocyte particles differ from lipoproteins in CSF. J. Neurochem 70 :2070–81 9572293
39. Kim WS , Guillemin GJ , Glaros EN , Lim CK , Garner B . 2006. Quantitation of ATP-binding cassette subfamily-A transporter gene expression in primary human brain cells. Neuroreport 17 :891–96 16738483
40. Wahrle SE , Jiang H , Parsadanian M , Legleiter J , Han X , 2004. ABCA1 is required for normal central nervous system ApoE levels and for lipidation of astrocyte-secreted apoE. J. Biol. Chem 279 :40987–93 15269217
41. Lee J , Bu G . 2005. Genetics and molecular biology: ABCA1 in brain apolipoprotein E metabolism and lipidation. Curr. Opin. Lipidol 16 :115–17 15650570
42. Hayden MR , Clee SM , Brooks-Wilson A , Genest J Jr. , Attie A , Kastelein JJ . 2000. Cholesterol efflux regulatory protein, Tangier disease and familial high-density lipoprotein deficiency. Curr. Opin. Lipidol 11 :117–22 10787172
43. Wellington CL , Walker EK , Suarez A , Kwok A , Bissada N , 2002. ABCA1 mRNA and protein distribution patterns predict multiple different roles and levels of regulation. Lab. Investig 82 :273–83 11896206
44. Koldamova RP , Lefterov IM , Ikonomovic MD , Skoko J , Lefterov PI , 2003. 22R-hydroxycholesterol and 9-cis-retinoic acid induce ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 expression and cholesterol efflux in brain cells and decrease amyloid β secretion. J. Biol. Chem 278 :13244–56 12547833
45. Hirsch-Reinshagen V , Zhou S , Burgess BL , Bernier L , McIsaac SA , 2004. Deficiency of ABCA1 impairs apolipoprotein E metabolism in brain. J. Biol. Chem 279 :41197–207 15269218
46. Kim WS , Rahmanto AS , Kamili A , Rye K-A , Guillemin GJ , 2007. Role of ABCG1 and ABCA1 in regulation of neuronal cholesterol efflux to apolipoprotein E discs and suppression of amyloid-β peptide generation. J. Biol. Chem 282 :2851–61 17121837
47. Kaminski WE , Orso E , Diederich W , Klucken J , Drobnik W , Schmitz G . 2000. Identification of a novel human sterol-sensitive ATP-binding cassette transporter (ABCA7). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 273 :532–38 10873640
48. Wang N , Lan D , Gerbod-Giannone M , Linsel-Nitschke P , Jehle AW , 2003. ATP-binding cassette transporter A7 (ABCA7) binds apolipoprotein A-I and mediates cellular phospholipid but not cholesterol efflux. J. Biol. Chem 278 :42906–12 12917409
49. Sakae N , Liu CC , Shinohara M , Frisch-Daiello J , Ma L , 2016. ABCA7 deficiency accelerates amyloid-β generation and Alzheimer’s neuronal pathology. J. Neurosci 36 :3848–59 27030769
50. Naj AC , Jun G , Beecham GW , Wang LS , Vardarajan BN , 2011. Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33 and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 43 :436–41 21460841
51. Tarr PT , Edwards PA . 2008. ABCG1 and ABCG4 are coexpressed in neurons and astrocytes of the CNS and regulate cholesterol homeostasis through SREBP-2. J. Lipid Res 49 :169–82 17916878
52. Wang N , Yvan-Charvet L , Lutjohann D , Mulder M , Vanmierlo T , 2008. ATP-binding cassette transporters G1 and G4 mediate cholesterol and desmosterol efflux to HDL and regulate sterol accumulation in the brain. FASEB J. 22 :1073–82 18039927
53. Hirsch-Reinshagen V , Donkin J , Stukas S , Chan J , Wilkinson A , 2009. LCAT synthesized by primary astrocytes esterifies cholesterol on glia-derived lipoproteins. J. Lipid Res 50 :885–93 19065001
54. Yamada T , Kawata M , Arai H , Fukasawa M , Inoue K , Sato T . 1995. Astroglial localization of cholesteryl ester transfer protein in normal and Alzheimer’s disease brain tissues. Acta Neuropathol. 90 :633–36 8615085
55. Rapp A , Gmeiner B , Huttinger M . 2006. Implication of apoE isoforms in cholesterol metabolism by primary rat hippocampal neurons and astrocytes. Biochimie 88 :473–83 16376010
56. Kanekiyo T , Liu CC , Shinohara M , Li J , Bu G . 2012. LRP1 in brain vascular smooth muscle cells mediates local clearance of Alzheimer’s amyloid-β. J. Neurosci 32 :16458–65 23152628
57. Liu Q , Trotter J , Zhang J , Peters MM , Cheng H , 2010. Neuronal LRP1 knockout in adult mice leads to impaired brain lipid metabolism and progressive, age-dependent synapse loss and neurodegeneration. J. Neurosci 30 :17068–78 21159977
58. van Kerkhof P , Lee J , McCormick L , Tetrault E , Lu W , 2005. Sorting nexin 17 facilitates LRP recycling in the early endosome. EMBO J. 24 :2851–61 16052210
59. Fu Y , Zhao J , Atagi Y , Nielsen HM , Liu C-C , 2016. Apolipoprotein E lipoprotein particles inhibit amyloid-β uptake through cell surface heparan sulphate proteoglycan. Mol. Neurodegener 11 :37 27151330
60. Bento-Abreu A , Velasco A , Polo-Hernandez E , Perez-Reyes PL , Tabernero A , Medina JM . 2008. Megalin is a receptor for albumin in astrocytes and is required for the synthesis of the neurotrophic factor oleic acid. J. Neurochem 106 :1149–59 18466341
61. Chun JT , Wang L , Pasinetti GM , Finch CE , Zlokovic BV . 1999. Glycoprotein 330/megalin (LRP-2) has low prevalence as mRNA and protein in brain microvessels and choroid plexus. Exp. Neurol 157 :194–201 10222122
62. Kounnas MZ , Loukinova EB , Stefansson S , Harmony JA , Brewer BH , 1995. Identification of glycoprotein 330 as an endocytic receptor for apolipoprotein J/clusterin. J. Biol. Chem 270 :13070–75 7768901
63. LaFerla FM , Troncoso JC , Strickland DK , Kawas CH , Jay G . 1997. Neuronal cell death in Alzheimer’s disease correlates with apoE uptake and intracellular Abeta stabilization. J. Clin. Investig 100 :310–20 9218507
64. Wicher G , Larsson M , Fex Svenningsen A , Gyllencreutz E , Rask L , Aldskogius H . 2006. Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-2/megalin is expressed in oligodendrocytes in the mouse spinal cord white matter. J. Neurosci. Res 83 :864–73 16463279
65. Yeh FL , Wang Y , Tom I , Gonzalez LC , Sheng M . 2016. TREM2 binds to apolipoproteins, including APOE and CLU/APOJ, and thereby facilitates uptake of amyloid-beta by microglia. Neuron 91 :328–40 27477018
66. Nugent AA , Lin K , van Lengerich B , Lianoglou S , Przybyla L , 2020. TREM2 regulates microglial cholesterol metabolism upon chronic phagocytic challenge. Neuron 105 :837–54.e9 31902528
67. Sovic A , Balazs Z , Hrzenjak A , Reicher H , Panzenboeck U , 2004. Scavenger receptor class B, type I mediates uptake of lipoprotein-associated phosphatidylcholine by primary porcine cerebrovascular endothelial cells. Neurosci. Lett 368 :11–14 15342124
68. Havel RJ , Kane JP . 1973. Primary dysbetalipoproteinemia: predominance of a specific apoprotein species in triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. PNAS 70 :2015–19 4352966
69. Shore VG , Shore B . 1973. Heterogeneity of human plasma very low density lipoproteins. Separation of species differing in protein components. Biochemistry 12 :502–7 4345806
70. Utermann G , Jaeschke M , Menzel J . 1975. Familial hyperlipoproteinemia type III: deficiency of a specific apolipoprotein (apo E-III) in the very-low-density lipoproteins. FEBS Lett. 56 :352–55 169165
71. Zannis VI , Breslow JL , Utermann G , Mahley RW , Weisgraber KH , 1982. Proposed nomenclature of apoE isoproteins, apoE genotypes, and phenotypes. J. Lipid Res 23 :911–14 7130859
72. Das HK , McPherson J , Bruns GA , Karathanasis SK , Breslow JL . 1985. Isolation, characterization, and mapping to chromosome 19 of the human apolipoprotein E gene. J. Biol. Chem 260 :6240–47 3922972
73. McLean JW , Elshourbagy NA , Chang DJ , Mahley RW , Taylor JM . 1984. Human apolipoprotein E mRNA. cDNA cloning and nucleotide sequencing of a new variant. J. Biol. Chem 259 :6498–504 6327682
74. Farrer LA , Cupples LA , Haines JL , Hyman B , Kukull WA , 1997. Effects of age, sex, and ethnicity on the association between apolipoprotein E genotype and Alzheimer disease. A meta-analysis. JAMA 278 :1349–56 9343467
75. Weisgraber KH , Rail SC Jr. , Mahley RW . 1981. Human E apoprotein heterogeneity. Cysteine-arginine interchanges in the amino acid sequence of the apo-E isoforms. J. Biol. Chem 256 :9077–83 7263700
76. Rall SC Jr. , Weisgraber KH , Mahley RW . 1982. Human apolipoprotein E. The complete amino acid sequence. J. Biol. Chem 257 :4171–78 7068630
77. Arboleda-Velasquez JF , Lopera F , O'Hare M , Delgado-Tirado S , Marino C , 2019. Resistance to autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease in an APOE3 Christchurch homozygote: a case report. Nat. Med 25 :1680–83 31686034
78. Medway CW , Abdul-Hay S , Mims T , Ma L , Bisceglio G , 2014. ApoE variant p.V236E is associated with markedly reduced risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 9 :11 24607147
79. Liu CC , Murray ME , Li X , Zhao N , Wang N , 2021. APOE3-Jacksonville (V236E) variant reduces self-aggregation and risk of dementia. Sci. Transl. Med 13 :eabc9375 34586832
80. Abou Ziki MD , Strulovici-Barel Y , Hackett NR , Rodriguez-Flores JL , Mezey JG , 2014. Prevalence of the apolipoprotein E Arg145Cys dyslipidemia at-risk polymorphism in African-derived populations. Am. J. Cardiol 113 :302–8 24239320
81. Orth M , Weng W , Funke H , Steinmetz A , Assmann G , 1999. Effects of a frequent apolipoprotein E isoform, ApoE4Freiburg (Leu28→Pro), on lipoproteins and the prevalence of coronary artery disease in whites. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol 19 :1306–15 10323784
82. Raulin AC , Kraft L , Al-Hilaly YK , Xue WF , McGeehan JE , 2019. The molecular basis for apolipoprotein E4 as the major risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. J. Mol. Biol 431 :2248–65 31051176
83. Yokoyama S , Kawai Y , Tajima S , Yamamoto A . 1985. Behavior of human apolipoprotein E in aqueous solutions and at interfaces. J. Biol. Chem 260 :16375–82 4066713
84. Wilson C , Wardell MR , Weisgraber KH , Mahley RW , Agard DA . 1991. Three-dimensional structure of the LDL receptor-binding domain of human apolipoprotein E. Science 252 :1817–22 2063194
85. Chen J , Li Q , Wang J . 2011. Topology of human apolipoprotein E3 uniquely regulates its diverse biological functions. PNAS 108 :14813–18 21873229
86. Wetterau JR , Aggerbeck LP , Rall SC Jr. , Weisgraber KH . 1988. Human apolipoprotein E3 in aqueous solution. I. Evidence for two structural domains. J. Biol. Chem 263 :6240–48 3360781
87. Aggerbeck LP , Wetterau JR , Weisgraber KH , Wu CS , Lindgren FT . 1988. Human apolipoprotein E3 in aqueous solution. II. Properties of the amino- and carboxyl-terminal domains. J. Biol. Chem 263 :6249–58 3360782
88. Xu Q , Bernardo A , Walker D , Kanegawa T , Mahley RW , Huang Y . 2006. Profile and regulation of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) expression in the CNS in mice with targeting of green fluorescent protein gene to the ApoE locus. J. Neurosci 26 :4985–94 16687490
89. Huynh TV , Wang C , Tran AC , Tabor GT , Mahan TE , 2019. Lack of hepatic apoE does not influence early Aβ deposition: observations from a new APOE knock-in model. Mol. Neurodegener 14 :37 31623648
90. Bruinsma IB , Wilhelmus MM , Kox M , Veerhuis R , de Waal RM , Verbeek MM . 2010. Apolipoprotein E protects cultured pericytes and astrocytes from D-Aβ1–40-mediated cell death. Brain Res. 1315 :169–80 20034483
91. Nelissen K , Mulder M , Smets I , Timmermans S , Smeets K , 2012. Liver X receptors regulate cholesterol homeostasis in oligodendrocytes. J. Neurosci. Res 90 :60–71 21972082
92. Rasmussen KL , Tybjaerg-Hansen A , Nordestgaard BG , Frikke-Schmidt R . 2015. Plasma levels of apolipoprotein E and risk of dementia in the general population. Ann. Neurol 77 :301–11 25469919
93. Lin Y-T , Seo J , Gao F , Feldman HM , Wen H-L , 2018. APOE4 causes widespread molecular and cellular alterations associated with Alzheimer’s disease phenotypes in human iPSC-derived brain cell types. Neuron 98 :1141–54.e7 29861287
94. Riddell DR , Zhou H , Atchison K , Warwick HK , Atkinson PJ , 2008. Impact of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphism on brain ApoE levels. J. Neurosci 28 :11445–53 18987181
95. Ulrich JD , Burchett JM , Restivo JL , Schuler DR , Verghese PB , 2013. In vivo measurement of apolipoprotein E from the brain interstitial fluid using microdialysis. Mol. Neurodegener 8 :13 23601557
96. Cruchaga C , Kauwe JS , Nowotny P , Bales K , Pickering EH , 2012. Cerebrospinal fluid APOE levels: an endophenotype for genetic studies for Alzheimer’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet 21 :4558–71 22821396
97. Martinez-Morillo E , Nielsen HM , Batruch I , Drabovich AP , Begcevic I , 2014. Assessment of peptide chemical modifications on the development of an accurate and precise multiplex selected reaction monitoring assay for apolipoprotein E isoforms. J. Proteome Res 13 :1077–87 24392642
98. Conejero-Goldberg C , Gomar JJ , Bobes-Bascaran T , Hyde TM , Kleinman JE , 2014. APOE2 enhances neuroprotection against Alzheimer’s disease through multiple molecular mechanisms. Mol. Psychiatry 19 :1243–50 24492349
99. Keren-Shaul H , Spinrad A , Weiner A , Matcovitch-Natan O , Dvir-Szternfeld R , 2017. A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 169 :1276–90.el7 28602351
100. Krasemann S , Madore C , Cialic R , Baufeld C , Calcagno N , 2017. The TREM2-APOE pathway drives the transcriptional phenotype of dysfunctional microglia in neurodegenerative diseases. Immunity 47 :566–81.e9 28930663
101. Heinsinger NM , Gachechiladze MA , Rebeck GW . 2016. Apolipoprotein E genotype affects size of ApoE complexes in cerebrospinal fluid. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 75 :918–24 27516118
102. Yamauchi K , Tozuka M , Hidaka H , Hidaka E , Kondo Y , Katsuyama T . 1999. Characterization of apolipoprotein E-containing lipoproteins in cerebrospinal fluid: effect of phenotype on the distribution of apolipoprotein E. Clin. Chem 45 :1431–38 10471645
103. Li Z , Shue F , Zhao N , Shinohara M , Bu G . 2020. APOE2: protective mechanism and therapeutic implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 15 :63 33148290
104. Hu J , Liu C-C , Chen X-F , Zhang Y-W , Xu H , Bu G . 2015. Opposing effects of viral mediated brain expression of apolipoprotein E2 (apoE2) and apoE4 on apoE lipidation and Aβ metabolism in apoE4-targeted replacement mice. Mol. Neurodegener 10 :6 25871773
105. Zhao J , Davis MD , Martens YA , Shinohara M , Graff-Radford NR , 2017. APOE ε4/ε4 diminishes neurotrophic function of human iPSC-derived astrocytes. Hum. Mol. Genet 26 :2690–700 28444230
106. Garai K , Baban B , Frieden C . 2011. Dissociation of apolipoprotein E oligomers to monomer is required for high-affinity binding to phospholipid vesicles. Biochemistry 50 :2550–58 21322570
107. Hubin E , Verghese PB , van Nuland N , Broersen K . 2019. Apolipoprotein E associated with reconstituted high-density lipoprotein-like particles is protected from aggregation. FEBS Lett. 593 :1144–53 31058310
108. Frieden C , Wang H , Ho CMW . 2017. A mechanism for lipid binding to apoE and the role of intrinsically disordered regions coupled to domain-domain interactions. PNAS 114 :6292–97 28559318
109. Jain RS , Quarfordt SH . 1979. The carbohydrate content of apolipoprotein E from human very low density lipoproteins. Life Sci. 25 :1315–23 92742
110. Wernette-Hammond ME , Lauer SJ , Corsini A , Walker D , Taylor JM , Rail SC Jr . 1989. Glycosylation of human apolipoprotein E. The carbohydrate attachment site is threonine 194. J. Biol. Chem 264 :9094–101 2498325
111. Flowers SA , Grant OC , Woods RJ , Rebeck GW . 2020. O-glycosylation on cerebrospinal fluid and plasma apolipoprotein E differs in the lipid-binding domain. Glycobiology 30 :74–85 31616924
112. Lee Y , Kockx M , Raftery MJ , Jessup W , Griffith R , Kritharides L . 2010. Glycosylation and sialylation of macrophage-derived human apolipoprotein E analyzed by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry: evidence for a novel site of glycosylation on Ser290. Mol. Cell Proteom 9 :1968–81
113. Kawasaki K , Ogiwara N , Sugano M , Okumura N , Yamauchi K . 2009. Sialic acid moiety of apolipoprotein E and its impact on the formation of lipoprotein particles in human cerebrospinal fluid. Clin. Chim. Acta 402 :61–66 19138682
114. Lalazar A , Weisgraber KH , Rall SC Jr. , Giladi H , Innerarity TL , 1988. Site-specific mutagenesis of human apolipoprotein E. Receptor binding activity of variants with single amino acid substitutions. J. Biol. Chem 263 :3542–45 2831187
115. Weisgraber KH , Innerarity TL , Mahley RW . 1982. Abnormal lipoprotein receptor-binding activity of the human E apoprotein due to cysteine-arginine interchange at a single site. J. Biol. Chem 257 :2518–21 6277903
116. Kowal RC , Herz J , Weisgraber KH , Mahley RW , Brown MS , Goldstein JL . 1990. Opposing effects of apolipoproteins E and C on lipoprotein binding to low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein. J. Biol. Chem 265 :10771–79 2355022
117. Saito H , Dhanasekaran P , Nguyen D , Baldwin F , Weisgraber KH , 2003. Characterization of the heparin binding sites in human apolipoprotein E. J. Biol. Chem 278 :14782–87 12588864
118. Mann WA , Meyer N , Weber W , Meyer S , Greten H , Beisiegel U . 1995. Apolipoprotein E isoforms and rare mutations: parallel reduction in binding to cells and to heparin reflects severity of associated type III hyperlipoproteinemia. J. Lipid Res 36 :517–25 7775863
119. Atagi Y , Liu C-C , Painter MM , Chen X-F , Verbeeck C , 2015. Apolipoprotein E is a ligand for triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2). J. Biol. Chem 290 :26043–50 26374899
120. Michikawa M , Fan QW , Isobe I , Yanagisawa K . 2000. Apolipoprotein E exhibits isoform-specific promotion of lipid efflux from astrocytes and neurons in culture. J. Neurochem 74 :1008–16 10693931
121. Minagawa H , Gong JS , Jung CG , Watanabe A , Lund-Katz S , 2009. Mechanism underlying apolipoprotein E (ApoE) isoform-dependent lipid efflux from neural cells in culture. J. Neurosci. Res 87 :2498–508 19326444
122. Farmer BC , Kluemper J , Johnson LA . 2019. Apolipoprotein E4 alters astrocyte fatty acid metabolism and lipid droplet formation. Cells 8 :182
123. Marschallinger J , Iram T , Zardeneta M , Lee SE , Lehallier B , 2020. Lipid-droplet-accumulating microglia represent a dysfunctional and proinflammatory state in the aging brain. Nat. Neurosci 23 :194–208 31959936
124. Nathan BP , Jiang Y , Wong GK , Shen F , Brewer GJ , Struble RG . 2002. Apolipoprotein E4 inhibits, and apolipoprotein E3 promotes neurite outgrowth in cultured adult mouse cortical neurons through the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein. Brain Res. 928 :96–105 11844476
125. Holtzman DM , Pitas RE , Kilbridge J , Nathan B , Mahley RW , 1995. Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein mediates apolipoprotein E-dependent neurite outgrowth in a central nervous system-derived neuronal cell line. PNAS 92 :9480–84 7568158
126. Sun Y , Wu S , Bu G , Onifade MK , Patel SN , 1998. Glial fibrillary acidic protein-apolipoprotein E (apoE) transgenic mice: astrocyte-specific expression and differing biological effects of astrocyte-secreted apoE3 and apoE4 lipoproteins. J. Neurosci 18 :3261–72 9547235
127. Wang C , Wilson WA , Moore SD , Mace BE , Maeda N , 2005. Human apoE4-targeted replacement mice display synaptic deficits in the absence of neuropathology. Neurobiol. Dis 18 :390–98 15686968
128. Dumanis SB , Tesoriero JA , Babus LW , Nguyen MT , Trotter JH , 2009. ApoE4 decreases spine density and dendritic complexity in cortical neurons in vivo. J. Neurosci 29 :15317–22 19955384
129. Vitek MP , Brown CM , Colton CA . 2009. APOE genotype-specific differences in the innate immune response. Neurobiol. Aging 30 :1350–60 18155324
130. Shi Y , Yamada K , Liddelow SA , Smith ST , Zhao L , 2017. ApoE4 markedly exacerbates tau-mediated neurodegeneration in a mouse model of tauopathy. Nature 549 :523–27 28959956
131. Maezawa I , Nivison M , Montine KS , Maeda N , Montine TJ . 2006. Neurotoxicity from innate immune response is greatest with targeted replacement of ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E gene and is mediated by microglial p38MAPK. FASEB J. 20 :797–99 16481366
132. Blaschuk O , Burdzy K , Fritz IB . 1983. Purification and characterization of a cell-aggregating factor (clusterin), the major glycoprotein in ram rete testis fluid. J. Biol. Chem 258 :7714–20 6863260
133. Jones SE , Jomary C . 2002. Clusterin. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol 34 :427–31 11906815
134. Jenne DE , Tschopp J . 1992. Clusterin: the intriguing guises of a widely expressed glycoprotein. Trends Biochem. Sci 17 :154–59 1585460
135. Wong P , Pineault J , Lakins J , Taillefer D , Leger J , 1993. Genomic organization and expression of the rat TRPM-2 (clusterin) gene, a gene implicated in apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem 268 :5021–31 7680346
136. Burkey BF , deSilva HV , Harmony JA . 1991. Intracellular processing of apolipoprotein J precursor to the mature heterodimer. J. Lipid Res 32 :1039–48 1658176
137. de Silva HV , Stuart WD , Park YB , Mao SJ , Gil CM , 1990. Purification and characterization of apolipoprotein J. J. Biol. Chem 265 :14292–97 2387851
138. de Silva HV , Harmony JA , Stuart WD , Gil CM , Robbins J . 1990. Apolipoprotein J: structure and tissue distribution. Biochemistry 29 :5380–89 1974459
139. Calero M , Tokuda T , Rostagno A , Kumar A , Zlokovic B , 1999. Functional and structural properties of lipid-associated apolipoprotein J (clusterin). Biochem. J 344 (Part 2 ):375–83 10567218
140. Itakura E , Chiba M , Murata T , Matsuura A . 2020. Heparan sulfate is a clearance receptor for aberrant extracellular proteins. J. Cell Biol 219 :jcb.201911126
141. de Silva HV , Stuart WD , Duvic CR , Wetterau JR , Ray MJ , 1990. A 70-kDa apolipoprotein designated ApoJ is a marker for subclasses of human plasma high density lipoproteins. J. Biol. Chem 265 :13240–47 2376594
142. Borghini I , Barja F , Pometta D , James RW . 1995. Characterization of subpopulations of lipoprotein particles isolated from human cerebrospinal fluid. Biochim. Biophys. Acta Lipids Lipid Metab 1255 :192–200
143. Herring SK , Moon H-J , Rawal P , Chhibber A , Zhao L . 2019. Brain clusterin protein isoforms and mitochondrial localization. eLife 8 :e48255 31738162
144. Jenne DE , Lowin B , Peitsch MC , Bottcher A , Schmitz G , Tschopp J . 1991. Clusterin (complement lysis inhibitor) forms a high density lipoprotein complex with apolipoprotein A-I in human plasma. J. Biol. Chem 266 :11030–36 1904058
145. Rull A , Martinez-Bujidos M , Perez-Cuellar M , Perez A , Ordonez-Llanos J , Sanchez-Quesada JL . 2015. Increased concentration of clusterin/apolipoprotein J (apoJ) in hyperlipemic serum is paradoxically associated with decreased apoJ content in lipoproteins. Atherosclerosis 241 :463–70 26081122
146. Bonaterra-Pastra A , Fernandez-de-Retana S , Rivas-Urbina A , Puig N , Benitez S , 2021. Comparison of plasma lipoprotein composition and function in cerebral amyloid angiopathy and Alzheimer’s disease. Biomedicines 9 :72 33445800
147. Suzuki T , Tozuka M , Kazuyoshi Y , Sugano M , Nakabayashi T , 2002. Predominant apolipoprotein J exists as lipid-poor mixtures in cerebrospinal fluid. Ann. Clin. Lab. Sci 32 :369–76 12458888
148. Fagan AM , Holtzman DM , Munson G , Mathur T , Schneider D , 1999. Unique lipoproteins secreted by primary astrocytes from wild type, apoE (−/−), and human apoE transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem 274 :30001–7 10514484
149. DeMattos RB , Brendza RP , Heuser JE , Kierson M , Cirrito JR , 2001. Purification and characterization of astrocyte-secreted apolipoprotein E and J-containing lipoproteins from wild-type and human apoE transgenic mice. Neurochem. Int 39 :415–25 11578777
150. Murphy BF , Kirszbaum L , Walker ID , d'Apice AJ . 1988. SP-40,40, a newly identified normal human serum protein found in the SC5b-9 complex of complement and in the immune deposits in glomerulonephritis. J. Clin. Investig 81 :1858–64 2454950
151. Humphreys DT , Carver JA , Easterbrook-Smith SB , Wilson MR . 1999. Clusterin has chaperone-like activity similar to that of small heat shock proteins. J. Biol. Chem 274 :6875–81 10066740
152. Lamoureux F , Thomas C , Yin MJ , Kuruma H , Beraldi E , 2011. Clusterin inhibition using OGX-011 synergistically enhances Hsp90 inhibitor activity by suppressing the heat shock response in castrate-resistant prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 71 :5838–49 21737488
153. Pohlkamp T , Wasser CR , Herz J . 2017. Functional roles of the interaction of APP and lipoprotein receptors. Front. Mol. Neurosci 10 :54 28298885
154. Tsujita M , Vaisman B , Chengyu L , Vickers KC , Okuhira KI , 2021. Apolipoprotein A-I in mouse cerebrospinal fluid derives from the liver and intestine via plasma high-density lipoproteins assembled by ABCA1 and LCAT. FEBS Lett. 595 :773–88 33020907
155. Stukas S , Robert J , Lee M , Kulic I , Carr M , 2014. Intravenously injected human apolipoprotein A-I rapidly enters the central nervous system via the choroid plexus. J. Am. Heart Assoc 3 :e001156 25392541
156. Guo T , Zhang D , Zeng Y , Huang TY , Xu H , Zhao Y . 2020. Molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 15 :40 32677986
157. DeTure MA , Dickson DW . 2019. The neuropathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 14 :32 31375134
158. Alzheimer’s Assoc. 2020. 2020 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 16 :391–460
159. Novikova G , Andrews SJ , Renton AE , Marcora E . 2021. Beyond association: successes and challenges in linking non-coding genetic variation to functional consequences that modulate Alzheimer’s disease risk. Mol. Neurodegener 16 :27 33882988
160. Seto M , Weiner RL , Dumitrescu L , Hohman TJ . 2021. Protective genes and pathways in Alzheimer’s disease: moving towards precision interventions. Mol. Neurodegener 16 :29 33926499
161. Corder EH , Saunders AM , Risch NJ , Strittmatter WJ , Schmechel DE , 1994. Protective effect of apolipoprotein E type 2 allele for late onset Alzheimer disease. Nat. Genet 7 :180–84 7920638
162. Liu C-C , Kanekiyo T , Xu H , Bu G . 2013. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurol 9 :106–18 23296339
163. Foster EM , Dangla-Valls A , Lovestone S , Ribe EM , Buckley NJ . 2019. Clusterin in Alzheimer’s disease: mechanisms, genetics, and lessons from other pathologies. Front. Neurosci 13 :164 30872998
164. Aikawa T , Holm ML , Kanekiyo T . 2018. ABCA7 and pathogenic pathways of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Sci. 8 :27
165. Beecham GW , Vardarajan B , Blue E , Bush W , Jaworski J , 2018. Rare genetic variation implicated in non-Hispanic white families with Alzheimer disease. Neurol Genet. 4 :e286 30569016
166. Nagy Z , Esiri MM , Jobst KA , Johnston C , Litchfield S , 1995. Influence of the apolipoprotein E genotype on amyloid deposition and neurofibrillary tangle formation in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience 69 :757–61 8596645
167. Koudinov AR , Koudinova NV , Kumar A , Beavis RC , Ghiso J . 1996. Biochemical characterization of Alzheimer’s soluble amyloid beta protein in human cerebrospinal fluid: association with high density lipoproteins. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 223 :592–97 8687441
168. Permanne B , Perez C , Soto C , Frangione B , Wisniewski T . 1997. Detection of apolipoprotein E/dimeric soluble amyloid β complexes in Alzheimer’s disease brain supernatants. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 240 :715–20 9398632
169. Aleshkov S , Abraham CR , Zannis VI . 1997. Interaction of nascent ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4 isoforms expressed in mammalian cells with amyloid peptide β (1–40). Relevance to Alzheimer’s disease. Biochemistry 36 :10571–80 9265639
170. Choi-Miura NH , Ihara Y , Fukuchi K , Takeda M , Nakano Y , 1992. SP-40,40 is a constituent of Alzheimer’s amyloid. Acta Neuropathol. 83 :260–64 1373021
171. Namba Y , Tomonaga M , Kawasaki H , Otomo E , Ikeda K . 1991. Apolipoprotein E immunoreactivity in cerebral amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease and kuru plaque amyloid in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Brain Res. 541 :163–66 2029618
172. Bales KR , Verina T , Dodel RC , Du Y , Altstiel L , 1997. Lack of apolipoprotein E dramatically reduces amyloid β-peptide deposition. Nat. Genet 17 :263–64 9354781
173. DeMattos RB , O'Dell MA , Parsadanian M , Taylor JW , Harmony JAK , 2002. Clusterin promotes amyloid plaque formation and is critical for neuritic toxicity in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. PNAS 99 :10843–48 12145324
174. Xiong M , Jiang H , Serrano JR , Gonzales ER , Wang C , 2021. APOE immunotherapy reduces cerebral amyloid angiopathy and amyloid plaques while improving cerebrovascular function. Sci. Transi. Med 13 :eabd7522
175. Bell RD , Sagare AP , Friedman AE , Bedi GS , Holtzman DM , 2007. Transport pathways for clearance of human Alzheimer’s amyloid β-peptide and apolipoproteins E and J in the mouse central nervous system. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab 27 :909–18 17077814
176. Ghiso J , Matsubara E , Koudinov A , Choi-Miura NH , Tomita M , 1993. The cerebrospinal-fluid soluble form of Alzheimer’s amyloid β is complexed to SP-40,40 (apolipoprotein J), an inhibitor of the complement membrane-attack complex. Biochem. J 293 (Part 1 ):27–30 8328966
177. Chen F , Swartzlander DB , Ghosh A , Fryer JD , Wang B , Zheng H . 2021. Clusterin secreted from astrocyte promotes excitatory synaptic transmission and ameliorates Alzheimer’s disease neuropathology. Mol. Neurodegener 16 :5 33517893
178. Wojtas AM , Sens JP , Kang SS , Baker KE , Berry TJ , 2020. Astrocyte-derived clusterin suppresses amyloid formation in vivo. Mol. Neurodegener 15 :71 33246484
179. Deane R , Sagare A , Hamm K , Parisi M , Lane S , 2008. apoE isoform-specific disruption of amyloid β peptide clearance from mouse brain. J. Clin. Investig 118 :4002–13 19033669
180. Jiang Q , Lee CYD , Mandrekar S , Wilkinson B , Cramer P , 2008. ApoE promotes the proteolytic degradation of Aβ. Neuron 58 :681–93 18549781
181. Najm R , Jones EA , Huang Y . 2019. Apolipoprotein E4, inhibitory network dysfunction, and Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 14 :24 31186040
182. Zhao J , Fu Y , Yamazaki Y , Ren Y , Davis MD , 2020. APOE4 exacerbates synapse loss and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease patient iPSC-derived cerebral organoids. Nat Commun. 11 :5540 33139712
183. Wang C , Xiong M , Gratuze M , Bao X , Shi Y , 2021. Selective removal of astrocytic APOE4 strongly protects against tau-mediated neurodegeneration and decreases synaptic phagocytosis by microglia. Neuron 109 :1657–74.e7 33831349
184. Litvinchuk A , Huynh TV , Shi Y , Jackson RJ , Finn MB , 2021. Apolipoprotein E4 reduction with antisense oligonucleotides decreases neurodegeneration in a tauopathy model. Ann. Neurol 89 :952–66 33550655
185. Zhao N , Liu CC , Van Ingelgom AJ , Linares C , Kuril A , 2018. APOE ε2 is associated with increased tau pathology in primary tauopathy. Nat. Commun 9 :4388 30348994
186. Wahrle SE , Jiang H , Parsadanian M , Kim J , Li A , 2008. Overexpression of ABCA1 reduces amyloid deposition in the PDAPP mouse model of Alzheimer disease. J. Clin. Investig 118 :671–82 18202749
187. Williams T , Borchelt DR , Chakrabarty P . 2020. Therapeutic approaches targeting Apolipoprotein E function in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener 15 :8 32005122
188. Zhao J , Fu Y , Liu C-C , Shinohara M , Nielsen HM , 2014. Retinoic acid isomers facilitate apolipoprotein E production and lipidation in astrocytes through the retinoid X receptor/retinoic acid receptor pathway. J. Biol. Chem 289 :11282–92 24599963
189. Tai LM , Koster KP , Luo J , Lee SH , Wang YT , 2014. Amyloid-β pathology and APOE genotype modulate retinoid X receptor agonist activity in vivo. J. Biol. Chem 289 :30538–55 25217640
190. Riddell DR , Zhou H , Comery TA , Kouranova E , Lo CF , 2007. The LXR agonist TO901317 selectively lowers hippocampal Aβ42 and improves memory in the Tg2576 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Cell Neurosci 34 :621–28 17336088
191. Fan J , Zhao RQ , Parro C , Zhao W , Chou HY , 2018. Small molecule inducers of ABCA1 and apoE that act through indirect activation of the LXR pathway. J. Lipid Res 59 :830–42 29563219
192. Serrano-Pozo A , Das S , Hyman BT . 2021. APOE and Alzheimer’s disease: advances in genetics, pathophysiology, and therapeutic approaches. Lancet Neurol. 20 :68–80 33340485
193. Rajan KB , Barnes LL , Wilson RS , McAninch EA , Weuve J , 2017. Racial differences in the association between apolipoprotein E risk alleles and overall and total cardiovascular mortality over 18 years. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc 65 :2425–30 28898389
