LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


8606502
1428
J Appl Gerontol
J Appl Gerontol
Journal of applied gerontology : the official journal of the Southern Gerontological Society
0733-4648
1552-4523

35766623
9561042
10.1177/07334648221109514
NIHMS1815303
Article
Reflections on Mentorship From Scientists and Mentors in an Alzheimer’s Disease Focused Research Training Program
Johnson Christiana L. 1
Friedman Daniela B. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9359-093X
12
Ingram Lucy A. 12
Ford Marvella E. 3
McCrary-Quarles Audrey 4
Dye Cheryl J. 5
Miller Margaret C. 26
Ariyo Oluwole 7
Bagasra Omar 8
Chen Hongtu 9
McCollum Quentin 210
Levkoff Sue E. 210
1 Department of Health Promotion, Education, and Behavior, Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
2 Office for the Study of Aging, Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
3 Department of Public Health Sciences, MUSC, Charleston, SC, USA
4 Department of Health Sciences, South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, SC, USA
5 Department of Public Health, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, USA
6 Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
7 Department of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Allen University, Columbia, SC, USA
8 Department of Biology, Claflin University, Orangeburg, SC, USA
9 Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
10 College of Social Work, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Corresponding Author: Daniela B. Friedman, Department of Health Promotion, Education, and Behavior, Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, 915 Greene St., Suite 557, Columbia, SC 29208-0001, USA. dbfriedman@sc.edu
16 6 2022
11 2022
29 6 2022
01 11 2022
41 11 23072315
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
This paper presents reflections on mentorship from scientists and mentors of the National Institute on Aging (NIA)-funded Carolina Center on Alzheimer’s Disease and Minority Research (CCADMR). Using a network approach to mentoring, this program aims to increase the pipeline of underrepresented minority (URM) scientists studying Alzheimer’s disease (AD) disparities. Six mentors and five scientists participated in interviews. Thematic analysis identified recurring themes; transcripts of mentors and scientists were compared. Most common thematic categories identified by mentors included experience interacting with scientists, goals as a mentor, recruitment of underrepresented minorities, scientists’ challenges, and programmatic qualities. The most mentioned categories by scientists were challenges, seminars, working with mentors, career development, and project experience. The CCADMR will use findings to enhance the experience and training methods for future grant years. Results can benefit other training programs focused on aging and AD.

Alzheimer’s disease
underrepresented minority
mentorship
career development
qualitative
reflections

pmcIntroduction

The representation of ethnic and racial minority faculty in academia is sparse. Underrepresented minority (URM) scholars are less likely to apply for and secure tenure-track positions (Ransdell et al., 2021; Rucks-Ahidiana, 2019). Data of the U.S Department of Education from 2018 suggests that faculty composition consisted of 40% White males; 35% White females; 7% Asian/Pacific Islander males; 5% Asian/Pacific Islander females; and 3% Black males, Black females, Hispanic males, and Hispanic females combined (Irwin et al., 2021). Even more alarming is the disparity in academic rank. URMs are disproportionately underrepresented at the professorial and administrative ranks (Whittaker et al., 2015). 80 percent of full professors are White; 11% are Asian/Pacific Islander; 4% are Black; 3% are Hispanic, and 2% each are American Indian/Alaska Native or two or more races (Irwin et al., 2021). In efforts to encourage promotion and tenure among URM faculty members, research mentorship is critical to support advancement (Alegría et al., 2019).

The culture of an institution may require a different approach to mentoring in efforts to assist URM with academic advancement (Beech et al., 2013). Traditional mentorship models rely on the guidance of an experienced faculty member to support early-career faculty members in a one-on-one relationship (DeCastro et al., 2013; Sorcinelli &amp; Yun, 2007). While this approach can be successful, a mentorship network, where guidance and expertise is shared from multiple experienced faculty, is key in assisting with the development of scholars, especially for URM (Sorcinelli &amp; Yun, 2007). URM faculty often receive significantly less mentoring than their nonminority peers (Beech et al., 2013; Friedman et al., 2021). This is critical as the requirement for academic promotion often depends on research productivity. Moreover, the role of the faculty mentor is particularly useful for preserving and sharing cultural, political, institutional, and social knowledge, which may not be explicitly stated, but especially relevant for URMs (Zambrana et al., 2015).

Due to the increasing rate of Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias (ADRD) in ethnically diverse populations (Agarwal et al., 2020), ADRD researchers should be representative of these populations. Diversification of ADRD researchers can lead to an increase in the participation of racially and ethnically diverse populations in aging and ADRD research (Babulal et al., 2019). Training programs that focus on increasing URM participation in ADRD research offer an opportunity to unearth culturally relevant methods and programs aimed at reducing URM disparities (Croff et al., 2020; Ingram et al., 2021). Moreover, training programs that are part of a multi-center network (i.e., programs consisting of multiple institutions), can prepare scholars for early career success by increasing opportunities for large-scale ADRD-focused projects, grant submissions, networking, and career advancement (Croff et al., 2020).

Established in 2017 at the University of South Carolina, the Carolina Center on Alzheimer’s Disease and Minority Research (CCADMR) is a National Institute on Aging (NIA)-funded ADRD-focused Resource Center for Minority Aging Research (RCMAR). 10 general RCMARs and 8 ADRD-focused RCMARs are currently funded (Harawa et al., 2017). The CCADMR provides research mentorship on the determinants of ADRD disparities for faculty members at three South Carolina Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs): Allen University, Claflin University, and South Carolina State University. Clemson University and the Medical University of South Carolina are also partner institutions. The program is guided by the National Center of Leadership in Academic Medicine (NCLAM) Faculty Development Model, which has demonstrated academic success for URM through participation in faculty development (Daley et al., 2011). This framework highlights the importance of overlapping needs (e.g., mentoring, networking, and professional skills development) that are instrumental for understanding institutional culture and academic productivity. Extending from this method, the CCADMR uses a team-based approach to help develop scholars’ research in ADRD disparities. The team-based approach to mentoring allows for scientists to tap into a variety of perspectives of knowledge from multiple mentors from differing backgrounds (Dossett et al., 2020). Mentees have access to a wide range of resources that help them problem solve and ultimately demonstrate their ability to propose and conduct novel ADRD research.

Recruitment of scientists is conducted through a Call for Proposals via listservs and word-of-mouth promotion at all partner institutions each Fall semester. Those eligible to apply must have a terminal degree and hold a position at one of the six partner institutions as a post-doctoral fellow, junior faculty, or mid-career faculty member who is transitioning to ADRD research.

Proposed projects are required to concentrate on the sociocultural, behavioral, and environmental determinants of ADRD disparities through analysis of primary or secondary data. If scientists are using secondary data, one (or more) of the following datasets are recommended: South Carolina Alzheimer’s Disease Registry, Health and Retirement Study, and the Behavioral Risk Factor and Surveillance System. Projects are approved based on the quality of the proposed research, alignment of the proposed research to the CCADMR mission, and likelihood that the work will lead to further ADRD scholarly activity and subsequent extramurally funded projects.

Selected applicants or scientists, as they are referred to for the remainder of this paper, are awarded $30,000 and assigned three mentors. Upon selection and invitation to be part of the CCADMR, scientists are asked to complete a Scientist Agreement Form that outlines milestones, deliverables, timelines, and expectations. Details include formulating a career development plan, submitting progress reports, attending monthly seminars, and developing a manuscript based on project findings (Ingram et al., 2021). Mentors also complete a Mentor Agreement Form. Mentors and scientists are asked to communicate about their level of contact as it is not specified in the agreements but needs to be discussed and agreed upon by the scientist and mentor team. Scientists receive professional development through monthly seminars, often offered through a virtual webinar format. Some seminar dates are reserved for scientists to present their progress and findings to other scientists and faculty. This additional feedback further expands the team-based mentoring approach from three mentors to the core network, increasing opportunities for input from an even more diverse group of scholars. Currently, prior scientists are also involved in mentoring new scientists. This paper examines the reflections of CCADMR scientists and mentors during a midcourse review to better understand the effectiveness of the program and to identify areas for improving the training experience for URM scientists conducting ADRD research.

Methods

There were two aspects to this evaluation. First a purposive sample of scientists and mentors were asked to complete to a short three-item survey that requested information about: (a) self-reported race and ethnicity, (b) academic rank, and (c) career successes from participating in the CCADMR program. Mentors self-identified as White, Black/African American, Asian/Asian American, and Pacific Islander. Their academic ranks included full, associate, and assistant professor. Scientists self-identified as Black/African American, White, Hispanic/Latino, Asian/Asian American and Pacific Islander, and other (Iranian).

The second component was a 60-minute qualitative interview conducted with both CCADMR mentors and scientists. Our evaluation and the qualitative interview instruments were guided by the NCLAM Faculty Development Model, which demonstrates success in mentoring URM faculty through a structured program (Daley et al., 2011). The interview guide was developed to ask questions that the NCLAM highlighted as areas URM mentioned as being critical in their self-reported academic success (Daley et al., 2011). These areas of emphasis were peer networking, professional skills development, mentoring, and learning about institutional culture.

A male external evaluator, not involved in any center activities except evaluation, conducted the interviews. A total of 19 mentors and 12 scientists—all those involved with the CCADMR grant—were contacted by email and invited to participate in this midcourse exit interview regarding their experiences in the program and perceptions about the mentorship experience.

Interview questions are provided in Supplementary Appendix A. Scientists were asked a total of 25 questions. Question topics related to their perceptions about the program, their project experience, the relationship with their mentors, and their career development. Mentors were asked 10 questions that explored their perceptions regarding their scientist’s scholarship development and progression, goals as a mentor, and reflections on the center’s goals to enhance scientists’ involvement in ADRD research. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, all interviews with mentors and scientists shifted to a virtual format using Zoom, emails, and telephone calls between Fall 2020 and Summer 2021. Interviews were audio recorded, deidentified, and transcribed using a professional transcription company prior to analysis. The institutional review board deemed this project to be nonhuman subjects research.

Data Analysis

All coding was completed using Atlas.ti 9. Thematic analysis (Braun &amp; Clarke, 2006) was used to examine in-depth the interview transcripts of scientists and mentors. Two codebooks were developed—one for mentor interviews and one for scientist interviews. Codes were derived from the primary topics and interview questions. Each interview was coded by the primary author and reviewed by a second author. Initial codes were grouped into themes and subthemes, which were developed based on the interview guides for both the mentors and scientists. To ensure quality coding, inter-coder reliability was established by discussing identified codes between the two authors. These authors then reviewed the spreadsheet of final themes and subthemes with corresponding transcript quotes until there was complete agreement on coding categories and main emergent themes and subthemes. Emergent codes were added to the codebooks in an iterative manner until no new codes were found from the transcript review. Verbatim quotes were used to support themes and to help validate the authors’ coding interpretations (Corbin &amp; Strauss, 2008).

Results

Scientists’ self-reported milestones attributed to the program on the survey included academic promotions, participation on panels at national conferences, and publications on their CCADMR projects (See Table 1). Five mentors and six scientists participated in semi-structured interviews. Presentation of interview themes follows.

“You’re already preparing yourself to become quite a mature researcher”: Scientists’ Perspectives

Scientists expressed that the CCADMR was instrumental in their career development. Before completion of the program, scientists’ academic ranks included associate professor, assistant professor, and post-doctoral student. Upon completion of the program, three scientists were promoted to associate professor with tenure. Table 1 presents specific academic and career milestones that scientists attributed to program participation.

Given the wide range of rank and positions in the careers of the scientists, the mentoring experience likely varied and addressed different facets of career development. For example, some scientists learned how to work with large datasets for the first time while others may have been expanding upon previous research by adding data from the Alzheimer’s Disease Registry into their current work. Multiple themes emerged from interviews with scientists. The most mentioned themes focused on: specific project challenges, seminar benefits, working and communicating with mentors, career development, and project experience and professional development.

Challenges With Obtaining Data, Time Management, and Analysis

Scientists expressed that they experienced several challenges, particularly around the unanticipated length of time required to gain access to datasets needed for their pilot projects. Scientists who could not gain access to their data as outlined in their pilot grant often needed to modify their data collection strategy and project aims. Other challenges that the scientists experienced were related to time management and difficulty with data analysis, as this was often their first experience in engaging with secondary data analysis of large population-based datasets.

I had challenges with obtaining data, …. So, actually even up until today, I haven’t received the data that I proposed in the beginning. But one of my mentors had suggested that I look at the Alzheimer’s disease registry data to see if I could do some preliminary analysis.

I wouldn’t say having to do it after hours, that made it burdensome, but that was what do they say, the nature of the beast because my teaching was my primary – I hate to say it like this – my primary job.

Seminars for Building Academic Skills

The program offers scientists the opportunity to attend seminars that focus on a variety of topics including grant and manuscript writing, data analysis, collaboration techniques, and workshopping upcoming presentations and papers. Through the seminars, scientists from different institutions also had the opportunity to network with each other. Most scientists viewed the seminars as helpful and some even expressed interest in attending the seminars following completion of their projects.

…it was helpful to see what the other scientists were doing. It made it seem like we were getting support and we got good feedback from the mentors … It made me feel that I had support, that I could ask if I ever had a question.

I had a pilot project and my part has ended, but I’m still participating in some of the monthly educational seminars that they have and whatever events they have…

Working and Communicating With Mentors

Scientists expressed overwhelming appreciation for their mentors’ support. Most scientists described how each mentor offered a different type of support. For example, one would provide feedback on writing, while another would help with data analysis. Sometimes they would rely on their mentors to encourage them when they were hesitant about their work. They also mentioned receiving informal mentorship from the CCADMR investigator team during webinars and meetings.

[They’d] say, “Oh, you know, good job. And next time let’s talk about this, this, and this.” It was helpful to get communication from the mentors, because even though I could do things on my own it felt good to be supported and that they wanted me to succeed.

I feel as if I can reach out to any three of my mentors or any of the other mentors for advice on ADRD-related project ideas or problems.

Career Development

Most scientists shared that they wanted to continue doing ADRD research even after completing the program. When asked how the program helped with career development, they expressed specific benefits such as learning how to work with big data and investigating health disparities, both of which they wanted to pursue in the future. They shared how this program helped them with their personal career trajectory and goals. For example, scientists expressed that they wanted to publish more, explore new grant opportunities, and develop new research plans related to ADRD.

[It was] helpful because it helped me explore ADRD, an area that I was interested in, but I hadn’t started working on yet. It was helpful to get into the data and also to receive information via the seminars and to have mentors that were knowledgeable about… it’s giving me experience and new expertise in an area that I wanted to be in.

[I] also learned more about working [in] … health disparities research, which is an area which was a goal of mine … I never had the opportunity up until this point… it’s relevant now with the state of the world.

Project Experience and Professional Development

When asked about their project experience and satisfaction, scientists were generally satisfied with the progress or completion of their project. For many of the participants, this was the first time that they had used large national datasets and conducted secondary data analysis.

As a researcher, I always want to be doing more, and I always think I should’ve used that day off to develop a new research plan or write more on the introduction … figure out different options for grants. So, I think somewhat satisfied or moderately satisfied is where I’ m at.

… going back to data analysis, when I was first told about the project, I was like, “Okay, yeah, I’d love to be a part of it.” And then when I actually got in and I was learning about the project and it was analysis of a big data set, I’m like, “Oh, Lord, I’ve never done that before,” you know, “cause my things have been, you know, intervention studies, things like that.”

“I want people to be able to learn just in general the whole context that goes into being a faculty member”: Mentors’ Perspectives

Similar to the scientists, multiple themes emerged from the interviews with the mentors. The most recurring thematic categories were as follows: mentors’ experiences interacting with scientists, goals as a mentor, recruitment of underrepresented minorities, scientists’ challenges, and programmatic qualities.

Experiences Interacting With Scientists

Many mentors identified their primary method of communication with scientists being through email and video calls. When asked how they viewed themselves as a mentor, participants acknowledged the importance of communication and how it can be helpful for seamless integration of differing workstyles of scientists and mentors.

They have the goals through the project, but sometimes it’s hard to have a conversation with faculty in general, right, about, “Did you meet your goal this week? Did you meet your goal? Did you meet your goal?”

Some mentors found it difficult to have consistent communication from their mentees when looking for updates on their projects.

So, from a mentor perspective, though, [this person] is an associate professor … busy …doing … own thing.

The importance of communication was also acknowledged when mentors were asked about their goals as a mentor. While most expressed that they saw their role to be in encouraging support, others felt that the lack of communication between them and their scientists made it difficult to be a supportive resource.

We didn’t have a lot of mentoring team meetings in the first year as much as we’re having now, but if you’re not in regular communication then if something changes for a project and then you’re caught off guard, nobody should be in that position where a mentor is caught off guard by something, and/or a mentee sees that there’s a reaction because they haven’t been in touch.

Ideas for Effective Mentoring

When asked about their goals as a mentor, many of the experienced faculty shared that they felt the mentor should be flexible and establish their expectations at the beginning of the working relationship.

I think there should be understanding their goals with respect to engagement when it comes to what is expected of mentors and mentees, and that relationship can help with the other things.

Sometimes the mentee does need to be given the space to develop the goal within the mentor/mentee relationship, but my own experience has been more often with younger researchers who needed the support more than the goal setting activity.

Recruitment and Involvement of Underrepresented Minorities

When asked about the programs’ success in recruiting a racially and ethnically diverse sample of scientists, mentors addressed the importance of including minority groups in the program by suggesting opportunities for recruitment and collaboration with organizations such as the Black Faculty Caucus at University of South Carolina. The Black Faculty Caucus “provides an opportunity to improve social wellbeing” by offering a “sense of community, professional welfare, development, and advocacy for Black faulty at the University of South Carolina” (University of South Carolina, n.d.), which may be instrumental with assisting programs with navigating the recruitment process.

I think at this stage of their career when they’re working in it they’re being pulled and – and I don’t want to generalize, but people are pulled in lots of different directions.

We are putting extra work on people who are already burdened and busy, and have the responsibilities that they already have… I think the overburdened piece is also, .. something that has come up … it’s something that we need to think about.

Perspectives on Scientists’ Challenges

Many of the mentors also shared that their scientists experienced multiple challenges being new to both ADRD research and secondary data analysis. They also expressed that scientists had some difficulties with time management and balancing their project and activities with their other responsibilities.

One is the technical … analysis of data … The other one is … knowledge around Alzheimer’s, around this population.

I’m not sure if it was not understanding the content or if it was just having not enough time to sit down and really focus on the writing because she was teaching so many courses.

…with our HBCU partners there’s such a high teaching load expectation with respect to teaching it’s harder for them to get out the research deliverables.

CCADMR Programmatic Qualities

When asked about their overall perceptions of the program, mentors expressed that scientists were receiving great benefits such as access to data sources, learning skill sets, and access to an ADRD network of scholars. Mentors also appreciated that this training opportunity allowed scientists to propose a wide variety of research questions.

I really think the program is set up wonderfully. I feel like a lot of people are getting a lot of benefits. I mean I’m getting benefits from this as well just working on different types of projects that I wouldn’t normally work on and meeting new professors – or meeting new mentees and that kind of thing.

I don’t think we can give all credit to the CCADMR and the pilot project, but when you’re working across institutions and you meet people in different places then it helps get your name out there, and hopefully she would feel comfortable reaching out to people in part of the CCADMR for other professional development, or grants.

Discussion

Results from interviews with both scientists and mentors highlighted benefits and challenges to the mentor network approach for training scientists in ADRD research. Mentors overwhelmingly expressed that reaching an agreeable cadence as well as a mode of communication are essential for the successful development and completion of scientists’ ADRD-focused research projects. A critical component of mentoring is establishing a mode of communication, which builds a relationship that is likely to increase the success of the mentee (Carpenter et al., 2015). As mentors expressed, learning how the scientist communicates was both necessary and effective in identifying ways to help blend both of their working styles for a successful project completion. Moreover, through communication, mentors were able to better comprehend how scientists recruited from HBCUs have a heavy teaching load at their institution, which oftentimes created unsurmountable barriers to their productivity as research scientists. For future cohorts, the mentors will focus on strategies to support these scientists in better time management to produce scholarly research.

Many mentors expressed that their role as a mentor involved being actively engaged with the scientists’ projects. They acted as a resource of ADRD knowledge and professional development. The mentors shared that they tried to be available for feedback on projects via a variety of methods such as telephone calls, teleconferencing, and email. In academia, a mentor’s availability and accessibility to their mentee demonstrates a commitment to their success (Barrett et al., 2017). Additionally, it helps with the development of expectations and accountability for deliverables on both the part of the mentee and mentor.

Reflecting on the importance of URM faculty needs and goals is critical as increasing diversity of ADRD researchers is the primary goal of this training program. Some scientists shared that they are either an assistant or associate professor at an HBCU. Faculty involvement in scholarly initiatives in addition to being committed to advising students and maintaining a full teaching load can lead to burn out (Preston et al., 2021). The CCADMR’s partnership with HBCUs to recruit URM faculty interested in expanding their research profile was effective; however, participation may have increased the scientists’ burden and potentially caused some burnout if they were not provided with release time from other responsibilities. This was evident in the mentors’ responses about the programs’ effectiveness with recruiting and including URM by expressing that some scientists were too busy with teaching to complete project deliverables. At some HBCUs getting appropriate support for release time from teaching and advising is challenging. However, there was some remarkable success among our scientists, whom despite many challenges were able to secure large research and developmental funding through competitive applications. Mentors also highlighted that URM faculty are often called upon with additional service requests, as for example, to represent their own minority group on committees, which increases their level of responsibility and consequently increases their academic burden (Carr et al., 2021).

Overall, mentors’ reflections of the program were positive. Mentors expressed this program helped scientists network and meet other scholars. As the program is designed, scientists are assigned a primary mentor and two additional mentors from the core team but they also have access to the entire network for advice and feedback on their project. The accessibility to multiple skillsets through a variety of faculty in the CCADMR provides an invaluable mentoring opportunity that would not exist in a one-one-one mentoring relationship (Sorcinelli &amp; Yun, 2007).

The seminars doubled as an opportunity for professional development. Mixed responses were recorded from scientists related to the length of the seminar. They also shared that they felt that some of the topics were not always useful. This suggests that the seminar topics should be based on suggestions given by the scientists at the outset of their training, as well as periodically during their year of program funding since needs might change over time. Some of the recommendations provided by the scientists included sharing examples of previous scientists’ projects, expounding on funding opportunities, and providing guidance on next steps after their projects were completed.

Scientists unanimously thought their mentors were helpful, accessible, and they were encouraging when scientists expressed feelings of self-doubt or perfectionism. This suggests that mentors are more than just academic support; they also act as teachers, advisors, and counselors (Sedlacek et al., 2007) and their active engagement in the scientists’ research process is a critical component for scientists’ scholarly development.

Challenges of the program were also noted during interviews. Mentors and scientists shared that scientists had difficulty accessing data from state agencies in a timely manner. One scientist had significant delays with getting IRB approvals at their institution. Mentors also shared that this had been the first time that many of the scientists engaged in ADRD research and/or in analysis of large population-based datasets. Therefore, it required that scientists learned a data analysis skillset and background information on the topic in a relatively short timeframe. Similarly, scientists expressed challenges related to time management and data access. Scientists overwhelmingly expressed that they had multiple responsibilities during their time in the program. This suggests that scientists interested in participating in the program should allot space and time in their schedule that allows them the time for working on their project. For example, they should take advantage of the center’s writing retreat initiative. Writing retreats are documented as a useful strategy to increase productivity and confidence (Kornhaber et al., 2016; Moore, 2003; Murray &amp; Newton, 2009; Petrova &amp; Coughlin, 2012; Stanley et al., 2017). Moreover, when feasible, the option to buy out of teaching would be beneficial for those with heavy teaching loads at their home institution.

Scientists applied to this program to help expand their academic research profile in ADRD. For most of them, this was their first time investigating ADRD, and for others, this was their first time engaging with secondary data analysis. The program also gave them an opportunity to enhance their grant writing skills and increase their level of competitiveness for additional funding. Findings suggest that the mentoring network approach has been effective. Most scientists shared that they gained skills from a variety of different mentors that, together helped them advance their research portfolios and their academic careers.

This study has limitations. A total of 19 mentors and 12 scientists were contacted by email and invited to participate in interviews but only five mentors and six scientists agreed and completed the interviews. This small sample size poses a limitation as it does not provide insights into the biases that may have been introduced by non-participation. Non-response could be due to various circumstances such as availability and power differentials regarding faculty rank and worry about non-confidentiality of responses. It is also possible that mentors and scientists who had a positive experience with the program chose to participate to share their perspectives and ideas, which may have introduced self-selection bias. Thus, results cannot be generalized to all mentors and scientists. In addition, the number of participants is small and the focus of the CCADMR is specific to ADRD, so the results cannot be generalized to training programs on other topics, but they are informative and can be useful to others developing training programs involving URM scientists.

Conclusion

This midcourse evaluation was conducted with the goal of improving and modifying the CCADMR based on the current experiences of mentors and scientists. Additional evaluations will be conducted to assess career trajectories and successes over time. Despite study limitations, this study was successful at demonstrating that the CCADMR’s approach is successful at encouraging academic productivity and professional development.

Findings suggest it may be beneficial to expand the program length beyond One year as much time can be spent waiting for data use approval. The CCADMR team will use results to enhance the training experience for future grant years. There are plans to provide additional seminar topics and resources about time management for those who are employed at institutions with heavy teaching loads. Our study provides insights into the benefits and challenges of a training program that uses a network mentoring model that aims to increase diversity in ADRD research.

Supplementary Material

suppl_material1

suppl_material2

Funding

The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health, National Institute on Aging Grant Number P30AGO59294. https://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000049

Table 1. Scientists’ reported milestones/accomplishments from participating in the CCADMR training programa.

Number of
Scientists	Milestones/Accomplishments	
3	Promoted with tenure to associate professor	
3	Making steady progress on their project manuscript and have identified funding for which they will apply that will build on this work	
2	Published manuscripts on their projects in journals including Frontiers in Public Health and The Journals of Gerontology	
1	Named chair of their department	
1	Served on a RCMAR panel at a national scientific meeting that highlighted their pilot project	
1	Presented research at a national aging meeting	
1	Secured extramural funding for research and development	
a This list reflects milestones/accomplishments of interview participants. A total of 42 publications were reported from all scientists in the training program.

What this paper adds:

Strategies for a team-mentored approach in research training programs for underrepresented minority faculty members

In-depth qualitative reflections data for enhancing training programs in aging and Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias

Applications of study findings:

Midcourse evaluation approach of research training programs is helpful for improving and modifying program aspects as needed in future years.

Process and structure of a team-based mentorship approach should be guided by input from both scientists and mentors.

Focusing on both research and professional development in aging and ADRD training programs will help with achieving career milestones.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Ethical Approval

University of South Carolina Office of Research Compliance Institutional Review Board Approval Number: Pro00082551

Supplemental Material

Supplement material for this article is available in online.


References

Agarwal P , Morris MC , &amp; Barnes LL (2020). Racial differences in dietary relations to cognitive decline and Alzheimer’s disease risk: Do we know enough? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14 , 359. 10.3389/fnhum.2020.00359.33100990
Alegría M , Fukuda M , Lapatin Markle S , &amp; NeMoyer A (2019). Mentoring future researchers: Advice and considerations. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 89 (3 ), 329–336. 10.1037/ort0000416 31070418
Babulal GM , Quiroz YT , Albensi BC , Arenaza-Urquijo E , Astell AJ , Babiloni C , Bahar-Fuchs A , Bell J , Bowman GL , Brickman AM , Chetelat G , Ciro C , Cohen AD , Dilworth Anderson P , Dodge HH , Dreux S , Edland S , Esbensen A , Evered L , &amp; O’Bryant SE (2019). Perspectives on ethnic and racial disparities in Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias: Update and areas of immediate need. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 15 (2 ), 292–312. 10.1016/j.jalz.2018.09.009
Barrett JL , Mazerolle SM , &amp; Nottingham SL (2017). Attributes of effective mentoring relationships for novice faculty members: Perspectives of mentors and mentees. Athletic Training Education Journal, 12 (2 ), 152–162. 10.4085/1202152
Beech BM , Calles-Escandon J , Hairston KG , Langdon MSE , Latham-Sadler BA , &amp; Bell RA (2013). Mentoring programs for underrepresented minority faculty in academic medical centers: A systematic review of the literature. Academic Medicine, 88 (4 ), 541–549. 10.1097/ACM.0b013e31828589e3 23425989
Black Faculty Caucus (n.d.). University of South Carolina. https://sc.edu/about/offices_and_divisions/provost/committees/blackfacultycaucus/index.php
Braun V , &amp; Clarke V (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3 (2 ), 77–101. 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Carpenter S , Makhadmeh N , &amp; Thornton L-J (2015). Mentorship on the doctoral level: An examination of communication faculty mentors’ traits and functions. Communication Education, 64 (3 ), 366–384. 10.1080/03634523.2015.1041997
Carr RM , Lane-Fall MB , South E , Brady D , Momplaisir F , Guerra CE , Montoya-Williams D , Dalembert G , Lavizzo-Mourey R , &amp; Hamilton R (2021). Academic careers and the COVID-19 pandemic: Reversing the tide. Science Translational Medicine, 13 (584 ), eabe7189. 10.1126/scitranslmed.abe7189 33692133
Corbin J , &amp; Strauss A (2008). Basics of qualitative research. In Techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory (3rd ed). Sage Publications.
Croff R , Tang W , Friedman DB , Balbim GM , &amp; Belza B (2020). Training the next generation of aging and cognitive health researchers. Gerontology &amp; Geriatrics Education, 43 (2 ), 1–17. 10.1080/02701960.2020.1824912
Daley SP , Broyles SL , Rivera LM , Brennan JJ , Lu ER , &amp; Reznik V (2011). A conceptual model for faculty development in academic medicine: The underrepresented minority faculty experience. Journal of the National Medical Association, 103 (9–10 ), 816–821. 10.1016/S0027-9684(15)30435-1 22364048
DeCastro R , Sambuco D , Ubel PA , Stewart A , &amp; Jagsi R (2013). Mentor networks in academic medicine: Moving beyond a dyadic conception of mentoring for junior faculty researchers. Academic Medicine, 88 (4 ), 488–496. 10.1097/ACM.0b013e318285d302 23425990
Dossett LA , Waljee JF , &amp; Dimick JB (2020). Ensuring equal access to mentorship and sponsorship for surgeons through structured team-based mentoring. Annals of Surgery, 272 (6 ), 939–940. 10.1097/SLA.0000000000004500 32941281
Friedman DB , Yelton B , Corwin SJ , Hardin JW , Ingram LA , Torres-McGehee TM , &amp; Alberg AJ (2021). Value of peer mentorship for equity in higher education leadership: A school of public health focus with implications for all academic administrators. Mentoring &amp; Tutoring: Partnership in Learning, 29 (5 ), 500–521. 10.1080/13611267.2021.1986795
Harawa NT , Manson SM , Mangione CM , Penner LA , Norris KC , DeCarli C , Scarinci IC , Zissimopoulos J , Buchwald DS , Hinton L , &amp; Perez-Stable EJ (2017). Strategies for enhancing research in aging health disparities by mentoring diverse investigators. Journal of Clinical and Translational Science, 1 (3 ), 167–175. 10.1017/cts.2016.23 28856013
Ingram LA , Ford ME , Johnson CL , Ashford-Carroll B , McCollum Q , Friedman DB , &amp; Levkoff SE (2021). Responding to the call: Building a training program to diversify the academy in Alzheimer’s disease research. Frontiers in Public Health, 9 , 787. 10.3389/fpubh.2021.671956
Irwin V , Zhang J , Wang X , Hein S , Wang K , Roberts A , York C , Barmer A , Bullock Mann F , &amp; Dilig R (2021). Report on the condition of education 2021. NCES 2021-144. National Center for Education Statistics.
Kornhaber R , Cross M , Betihavas V , &amp; Bridgman H (2016). The benefits and challenges of academic writing retreats: An integrative review. Higher Education Research &amp; Development, 35 (6 ), 1210–1227. 10.1080/07294360.2016.1144572
Moore S (2003). Writers’ retreats for academics: Exploring and increasing the motivation to write. Journal of Further and Higher Education, 27 (3 ), 333–342. 10.1080/0309877032000098734
Murray R , &amp; Newton M (2009). Writing retreat as structured intervention: Margin or mainstream? Higher Education Research &amp; Development, 28 (5 ), 541–553. 10.1080/07294360903154126
Petrova P , &amp; Coughlin A (2012). Using structured writing retreats to support novice researchers. International Journal for Researcher Development, 3 (1 ), 77–88. 10.1108/17597511211278661
Preston DC , James BA , Owens L , &amp; Njoku N (2021). This is how we do it: Promising practices for implementing an institutional transformation initiative at HBCUs. About Campus, 26 (3 ), 6–11. 10.1177/10864822211030618
Ransdell LB , Lane TS , Schwartz AL , Wayment HA , &amp; Baldwin JA (2021). Mentoring new and early-stage investigators and underrepresented minority faculty for research success in health-related fields: An integrative literature review (2010–2020). International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18 (2 ), 432. 10.3390/ijerph18020432
Rucks-Ahidiana Z (2019). The inequities of the tenure-track system. Inside higher ed. https://www.insidehighered.com/advice/2019/06/07/nonwhite-faculty-face-significant-disadvantages-tenure-track-opinion
Sedlacek WE , Benjamin E , Schlosser LZ , &amp; Sheu H-B (2007). Mentoring in academia: Considerations for diverse populations. In Allen T &amp; Eby L (Eds.), The Blackwell handbook of mentoring: A multiple perspectives approach (pp. 259–280). Blackwell Publishing.
Sorcinelli MD , &amp; Yun J (2007). From mentor to mentoring networks: Mentoring in the new academy. Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning, 39 (6 ), 58–61. 10.3200/CHNG.39.6.58-C4
Stanley IH , Hom MA , Chu C , &amp; Joiner TE (2017). Increasing research productivity and professional development in psychology with a writing retreat. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology, 3 (3 ), 249–256. 10.1037/stl0000089 29177187
Whittaker JA , Montgomery BL , &amp; Acosta VGM (2015). Retention of underrepresented minority faculty: Strategic initiatives for institutional value proposition based on perspectives from a range of academic institutions. Journal of Undergraduate Neuroscience Education, 13 (3 ), A136–A145.26240521
Zambrana RE , Ray R , Espino MM , Castro C , Douthirt Cohen B , &amp; Eliason J (2015). “Don’t leave us behind” the importance of mentoring for underrepresented minority faculty. American Educational Research Journal, 52 (1 ), 40–72. 10.3102/0002831214563063
