LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9607332
20707
Semin Cell Dev Biol
Semin Cell Dev Biol
Seminars in cell &amp; developmental biology
1084-9521
1096-3634

34896021
9680670
10.1016/j.semcdb.2021.12.002
NIHMS1763473
Article
Targeting tau only extracellularly is likely to be less efficacious than targeting it both intra- and extracellularly
Congdon Erin E. 1*
Jiang Yixiang 1
Sigurdsson Einar M. 12*
1 Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Neuroscience Institute New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016
2 Department of Psychiatry, Neuroscience Institute New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016
* Correspondence: Erin E. Congdon, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Neuroscience Institute, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, Science Building, 11th Floor, 435 East 30th Street, New York, NY 10016, Erin.Congdon@nyulangone.org, Or, Einar M. Sigurdsson, Ph.D., Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, Neuroscience Institute, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, Science Building, 11th Floor, 435 East 30th Street, New York, NY 10016, Einar.Sigurdsson@nyulangone.org
9 10 2022
6 2022
09 12 2021
01 6 2023
126 125137
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Aggregation of the tau protein is thought to be responsible for the neurodegeneration and subsequent functional impairments in diseases that are collectively named tauopathies. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common tauopathy, but the group consists of over 20 different diseases, many of which have tau pathology as their primary feature. The development of tau therapies has mainly focused on preventing the formation of and/or clearing these aggregates. Of these, immunotherapies that aim to either elicit endogenous tau antibodies or deliver exogenous ones are the most common approach in clinical trials. While their mechanism of action can involve several pathways, both extra- and intracellular, pharmaceutical companies have primarily focused on antibody-mediated clearance of extracellular tau. As we have pointed out over the years, this is rather surprising because it is well known that most of pathological tau protein is found intracellularly. It has been repeatedly shown by several groups over the past decades that antibodies can enter neurons and that their cellular uptake can be enhanced by various means, particularly by altering their charge. Here, we will briefly describe the potential extra- and intracellular mechanisms involved in antibody-mediated clearance of tau pathology, discuss these in the context of recent failures of some of the tau antibody trials, and finally provide a brief overview of how the intracellular efficacy of tau antibodies can potentially be further improved by certain modifications that aim to enhance tau clearance via specific intracellular degradation pathways.


pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia in the United States, and its impact will only grow as the percentage of elderly people in the population increases. The disease is defined by its hallmarks, the plaques composed mainly of amyloid-β (Aβ), and the neurofibrillary pathology composed primarily of the microtubule-associated protein tau. Many of the early attempts to create effective, disease modifying therapies focused on Aβ. However, once cognitive decline becomes apparent, tau pathology correlates more closely with symptom progression than Aβ deposition. At this point, when Aβ pathology and cognition have become decoupled, removal of plaques will have limited efficacy. Further, clinical trials focused on reducing Aβ using immunotherapy have had inconsistent if any effect on cognition, although Aβ antibodies can clearly reduce Aβ plaque burden [1, 2]. The recent FDA approval of aducanumab was based on its ability to clear Aβ deposits from the brain in spite of its effect on cognition not being well established. Clinical use of other Aβ antibodies with a similar profile is now being sought based on that justification. The stage has now been set to argue for approval of any compound that can clear disease hallmark peptide/protein aggregates from any organ even if it does not have a clear beneficial effect on function. Other approaches designed to reduce Aβ burden, such as γ- or β-secretase inhibitors have had no or sometimes detrimental effect on cognition [3–5]. Thus, in the absence of mass screening and effective therapies that could be administered well before symptoms occur, targeting tau rather than Aβ is more likely to be successful. In addition, there are multiple primary tauopathies which do not feature Aβ deposits.

A wide array of strategies have been proposed and tested in the effort to clear tau aggregates and slow the progression of AD, including inhibiting aggregation, stimulating autophagy, modulating phosphorylation, acetylation, truncation and glycosylation, and immunotherapy [6–9]. Using the body’s own immune system to target abnormal cells or protein deposits is an appealing prospect and has led to the development of immunotherapies for conditions as varied as AD and cancer. In the case of tau, promising preclinical results using both active and passive strategies against a range of tau epitopes have resulted in the initiation of multiple clinical trials with more candidates in development [6–9]. This review will focus on the mechanisms through which tau antibodies prevent the spreading of pathology between cells and promote intracellular clearance.

Tau Pathology

In the adult brain the microtubule-associated protein tau exists as a mixture of six isoforms spliced from the same gene on chromosome 17, differing in the inclusion or exclusion of exons 2, 3, and 10 [10–13]. Under normal conditions, tau is enriched in the axonal compartment where it contributes to microtubule spacing and regulation of transport [14–16]. Additionally, tau plays a role in the localization of other proteins and synaptic signaling [14–17]. In AD and other tauopathies, however, there is a loss of tau-microtubule binding, leading to tau’s mislocalization to the somatodendritic compartment, and the formation of tau aggregates.

The pathological tau in AD is heavily post-translationally modified, and this process begins prior to the formation of neurofibrillary tangles, up to decades before the onset of symptoms [321]. Notably, these modifications of tau are not exclusively pathological but they can also be physiological. The sites, types, and the number of modifications determine the status [18]. Hyperphosphorylation is the most studied of the modifications that tau undergoes in disease and one of the earliest discovered [19]. This process involves multiple kinases, 85 potential sites, and an increase from 1.9 to 6–8 moles of phosphate per mole of tau [20, 21]. The pattern of phosphorylation changes over the course of the disease with early pretangles visible in cell processes, and later in the cell body [21–24]. Further, in some cases the addition of phosphate to one site will prime others for further phosphorylation [25–27]. Phosphorylation both decreases the ability of tau to bind microtubules, and promotes tau assembly, thus contributing to both tau’s toxic loss and gain of function [21, 28]. Another modification is caspase cleavage. Caspases 2 and 3 cleave the C-terminus at Asp314 and 421 respectively, and caspase 6 cleaves sites in the N-terminus [29, 30]. In addition to its effects on microtubule binding and aggregation, caspase cleavage of tau’s C-terminus is associated with mitochondrial and synaptic impairment [31–34]. Both acetylation and N-glycosylation are also increased in AD. Acetylation can promote tau truncation while also preventing its clearance [16, 35], while glycosylation spurs tau polymerization by promoting phosphorylation and conformational changes [16, 36].

The overall effects of posttranslational modifications increase the amount of free assembly primed tau in the cytosol. In AD and other tauopathies, cells contain a heterogeneous mixture of tau multimers including paired helical and straight filaments, soluble oligomers, and twisted ribbon type fibrils [37–40]. The morphology of the tau multimers depends on the disease, whether mutations are present, how the tau is modified, and how the fibrils were induced. Small soluble aggregates and oligomeric species have been shown to induce acute toxicity in cells, and indeed larger fibrils may be beneficial in the short term by sequestering smaller ones [41–44]. In the longer term, however, the presence of tau polymers inside the cell impacts a host of processes, including energy metabolism, transport, synaptic function, and protein expression. Further, pathological tau can impair clearance by inhibiting macro- and chaperone-mediated autophagy, suggesting that tau pathology can become self-perpetuating once established. The detrimental effects of tau aggregates highlight the need for effective therapies.

Tau Immunotherapy

As stated above, researchers have targeted tau pathology using a wide range of strategies including immunotherapy. Initially, attempts to treat AD using antibodies focused on Aβ without success. In some clinical trials, immunotherapy against Aβ resulted in a reduction in tau levels, however these findings were not repeated in the larger Phase III testing. The correlation with symptom severity, and the existence of other primary tauopathies made targeting tau directly an attractive approach.

Immunotherapy can be divided into two categories, active and passive. Our group published the first successful reports of both methods using a peptide immunogen and an antibody targeting the phosphorylated (p) Ser396/404 region, respectively [45–48]. Since then, published reports have utilized both active and passive immunization against single or multiple phospho-, non-phospho- or conformational epitopes (for recent reviews see [2, 6–9, 49, 50]).

Preclinical testing showed that active immunization against tau can reduce pathology and improve the disease phenotype in transgenic animals with minimal adverse immune reactions. Two active immunotherapies, AADvac-1 and ACI-35 are currently in human trials. Previous reviews have summarized the results in detail [7, 8]. Briefly, both AADvac-1 and ACI-35 elicit generation of tau antibodies without apparent adverse effects [51]. Some beneficial effects of AADVac-1 have been reported in subgroups of trial subjects, namely reduction in neurofilament protein in cerebrospinal fluid, decreased brain atrophy in younger subjects and a trend towards reduced cognitive decline [52, 53]. Both therapies have clinical trials ongoing, and it remains to be seen whether they produce significant clinical benefits. Active immunization has several advantages such as low cost as well as a polyclonal and a long-lasting antibody response that may increase efficacy. Key concerns are potential autoimmune reactions, which have not been an issue in these trials but were observed in early preclinical reports that were likely due to the use of very strong adjuvants that are not approved for human use [54, 55].

The majority of tau immunotherapy studies and clinical trials utilize a passive immunization strategy (See Figure 1 for an overview of antibody structure and potential mechanisms). These antibodies recognize the N-terminus [56–84], mid region [82, 85–94], epitopes on or near the microtubule binding domain [95–103], conformational epitopes [104–111], p-Ser202 [104, 112], p-Thr231 [108, 113–117], p-Ser396/404 [42, 43, 47, 48, 113, 118–127], p-Ser409 [69], p-Ser413 [128], and p-Ser422 [129–131], and oligomers [132–134]. As of publication, eleven passive immunotherapies had reached the clinical trial stage. However, several of the human trials using N-terminus antibodies were terminated early [70–75]. Trials have been completed using antibodies recognizing the N-terminus [79, 80], mid region [88–91], conformational [109, 110], and p-Thr231 [115]. A trial using a p-Ser422 antibody was completed, but further research discontinued [131]. Studies utilizing N-terminus [81], microtubule binding domain [102, 103], mid-domain [92–94], p-Thr231 [116], conformational [135], and p-Ser396/404 [126] targeting antibodies are ongoing. In general, passive immunization has several advantages over active methods, such as a lowered chance of adverse immune responses and the ability to target specific epitopes. This second feature is important as it reduces the chances of targeting non-pathological tau and could allow for the treatment to be altered depending on which tau epitopes are more common during the stage or type of tauopathy. Further, the type of antibody used can be manipulated with passive immunotherapy. The specific IgG isotype can be selected and possibly altered to improve efficacy. Additionally, several types of antibody fragments have been utilized as therapy in cell and animal models as well.

There are several mechanisms by which both whole IgGs and antibody fragments could impact the course of disease. Antibodies can dissociate tau aggregates both inside and outside of the cell. There are also distinct ways in which targeting tau can be achieved extracellularly or intracellularly. In the following sections we will discuss both pathways, the available preclinical and clinical data, and relevant examples from other proteinopathies, to examine which methods have the greatest chance for success and suggest future directions.

Prevention and/or Reversal of Tau Assembly

As discussed above, in AD and related tauopathies, neurons contain a variety of tau multimers from small soluble oligomers to paired helical filaments [37–39], which can induce toxicity acutely or through longer term effects on cellular processes. Multiple small molecule inhibitors of tau aggregation have been tested in model systems and a few have advanced to clinical trials. Several recent studies demonstrate that tau antibodies may also work this way. Whole monoclonal antibodies raised against oligomers composed of a mutant microtubule binding fraction reduced tau assembly in vitro [134]. Atomic force microscopy revealed that two of them bound oligomeric tau and prevented further aggregation. One of these also prevented the formation of tau dimers, and larger polymers in a cell model expressing the self-assembling ΔK280 mutant tau fragment [134]. An scFv binding this same region slowed the polymerization of isolated tau protein and inhibited further assembly of exogenous human-derived tau seeds in cells [136]. We and others have also reported that anti-tau scFvs expressed in neurons or the eye prevents tauopathy induced phenotypes in drosophila models [137, 138]. Inhibition of pathological protein aggregation has been used as a strategy with other disorders as well. Transfecting HEK293 cells with an α-synuclein scFv which binds to the monomeric protein prevented the formation of higher order aggregates [139]. Similarly, in cells expressing mutant huntingtin, co-expression of an scFv or sdAb decreased polymerization [140–142]. This decreased aggregation also led to increased huntingtin turnover [141]. This mechanism has the potential to work both inside and outside the cell. Dissociation of oligomeric species, either in the interstitial fluid or cytosol, could prevent their acute toxic effects to neurons. There is no direct evidence for this speculation but it is based in part on our findings that a tau antibody can prevent acute toxicity of soluble pathological tau, and that acute functional benefits of short-term tau antibody treatment is associated with clearance of soluble phospho-tau [43, 143–145]. Extracellularly, this may make it easier for antibodies to neutralize tau, remove it from the CSF, or for microglia to digest it. Larger intracellular tau aggregates contribute to molecular crowding and longer-term impact on cell health. These larger filaments are resistant to digestion, and promoting dissociation would allow the cell to clear the resulting monomers and shorter fibrils more efficiently. Thus, preventing or reversing the formation of both types of aggregates should be beneficial but on a different time scale. However, the dynamics of the reactions must be carefully studied to ensure that changes in filament size are truly disaggregation rather than filament breakage, as breakage could result in an overall increase in seeding sites. Further, targeting the larger species cannot be allowed to result in increase in oligomers.

Extracellular Mechanisms

In the AD field, it has long been known that the development of tau pathology follows a stereotyped pattern, beginning in the transentorhinal region before progressing to anatomically connected regions [146, 147], and that the degree of tau pathology correlates with the severity of symptoms [148]. In addition, it was found that tau is increased in the cerebrospinal fluid of AD patients [149–154]. More recent discoveries have shown how those two findings are linked, demonstrating that pathological tau can spread between cells, possibly in a prion-like manner. Neurons secrete tau as monomers or aggregates [155–160], which are then taken up by neighboring cells where they can seed pathology in the native tau [161, 162]. This phenomenon has also been observed in other disorders, and indeed, may be a universal feature of neurodegenerative diseases caused by misfolded proteins [163, 164].

Tau may enter the extracellular space by several means. Following cell death and the breakdown of the plasma membrane, the protein in tangle bearing cells is released. In living cells, tau can be secreted either through direct translocation across the membrane or in vesicles. Even healthy cells shed some tau, suggesting that it may serve a signaling function under normal conditions [165]. However, in disease several factors lead to increased release, including the mislocalization of tau and its impaired digestion. Multiple groups have observed the presence of tau in exosomes and ectosomes, as well as vesicles derived from the autophagic or endosomal/lysosomal system. Endo- and exosomes containing pathological tau have been found in the CSF of AD patients, animal models, and purified from cultured neurons [159, 166–169]. Both the disruption of calcium homeostasis and aberrant neuronal activity seen in AD contribute to spreading of tau pathology by promoting vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane [158, 170, 171].

Once tau has entered the extracellular space it can be taken up by neighboring cells. This has been demonstrated in both animal models and in cells [161, 162]. Addition of exogenous tau to the brains of experimental animals or to culture media results in the seeding of tau pathology in the recipient cells. In addition, models that express tau only in specific brain regions show spreading of pathology across synapses [172, 173]. It should be noted though that there can be some leakage of the transgene into other brain regions that may explain at least some of the apparent spread [174]. Both naked and vesicular tau can be internalized by neurons. Exposed protein binds to the plasma membrane and is endocytosed in a heparin sulfate proteoglycan, or a low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1-dependent process [175–177,322]. Aggregation promoting tau species, or seeds, serve as a template to induce aggregation in the native tau. Seeds isolated from patients with different forms of tauopathy, or those prepared in vitro with differing structures, faithfully propagate fibrils with the same morphology [178]. All of these findings regarding the secretion and seeding of pathology suggest that extracellular tau is a valid target for tau antibodies.

Multiple groups have developed tau antibodies which are thought not to enter neurons and exert their effects entirely extracellularly [59, 60, 69, 104, 179, 180]. The aim of these treatments is to prevent the spreading of tau between neurons, either by sequestering the tau in complexes that can be cleared directly within the brain or peripherally, or by facilitating its clearance via microglial phagocytosis (see Figure 1).

Extracellular Blockage and Sequestration:

When both the tau and antibody are in the extracellular space, they can bind and form complexes, thus sequestering the abnormal protein. In cell and animal models, addition of exogenous tau can induce seeding in the cells that take it up. Pretreatment of the exogenous tau, either in the form of fibrils or lysate, with tau antibodies can reduce the seeding capacity of the pathological protein [58, 59, 85, 95, 181, 182]. Similar results can be seen when the tau and antibody are added to culture media together, uptake and seeding is prevented [42, 43, 60, 145, 179]. Using confocal microscopy tau-antibody complexes can be seen either bound to the plate or to cell membranes [43, 60]. Antibodies have also been shown to neutralize secreted tau over time in culture and prevent transsynaptic spread [85, 179]. However, this may depend on the antibody and/or its amount relative to extracellular tau levels since the tau-antibody complex can be taken up by neurons [183].

In vivo, treatment with antibodies that do not enter neurons is sufficient to reduce pathological tau levels in neurons and interstitial fluid, as well as improving behavioral phenotypes and lowering Aβ production [104, 179, 180, 184]. Interestingly, Castillo-Carranza et al. found that this clearance was accompanied by an increase in serum tau levels [180]. Similar results were seen using multiple tau antibodies in the JNPL3 and P301S tauopathy models [184, 185]. These findings suggest mechanisms through which the antibody-tau complexes could be either degraded within and/or cleared from the brain. The cells comprising the blood brain barrier express the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) and can facilitate the transport of IgGs bound to tau from the interstitial fluid into the bloodstream. Alternatively, and possibly concurrently, the increased plasma tau levels may be due to its increased half-life when bound to its antibody.

Researchers studying other neurodegenerative disorders have also obtained results showing the blockage of uptake and sequestration of pathological proteins using antibodies. Using two different antibodies, Tran et al. blocked the uptake of aggregated α-synuclein and its associated toxicity in culture and in vivo, as well as prevented spreading between cells [186]. The antibodies did not enter neurons and in culture formed complexes visible by confocal microscopy. Another antibody also prevented α-synuclein spreading in culture and in vivo, as well as bound to and sequestered the extracellular protein [187]. This was unlikely to involve microglial clearance as a modified version of the antibody lacking Fc binding was equally effective [187]. Pre-incubation of huntingtin containing media with a monoclonal antibody prevented uptake of the protein into HeLa cells without entering the cells or impacting the overall rate of endocytosis [188]. Incubation of preformed superoxide dismutase 1 seeds with an antibody recognizing the C terminus of the protein attenuated the development of pathology when the seeds were administered to transgenic mice, indicating that they had been sequestered and neutralized [189]. Further, this same antibody prevented seeding when delivered peripherally.

Microglial Clearance:

In addition to potential clearance into the periphery, extracellular antibody-tau complexes can be cleared within the brain itself by direct enzymatic degradation and/or more efficiently by microglia (and related phagocytic macrophages derived from the periphery). These phagocytic cells can internalize soluble and aggregated tau in culture and in vivo [190, 191]. In 2015, a group of reports showed that tau antibodies could increase microglial tau uptake. One of them, HJ8.5, had previously been shown to block seeding, reduce pathological tau levels in the brain of transgenic animals, and improve cognition [58]. Peripheral injections of the HJ8.5 antibody reduced pathology consistent with previous findings [185]. Probing the mechanism revealed that in addition to increasing the levels of antibody bound tau in plasma, HJ8.5 and two other antibodies also increased the levels of tau found in microglia [59, 185]. Uptake was Fcγ receptor-mediated and distinct from the heparan sulfate proteoglycan-based mechanism responsible for the uptake of the naked tau fibrils [59]. MC1, a conformational antibody, also promoted uptake of AD patient-derived tau in glial cells cultured from both mice and humans [105]. This response was also Fc-dependent, as the enhanced uptake was lost when using an MC1 Fab fragment lacking the receptor binding region [105]. Further reports showed that antibody-mediated clearance of tau through microglia required both Fc binding and unimpaired lysosomal function [124]. Blocking either receptor binding or the application of lysosomal inhibitors bafilomycin and chloroquine disrupted tau degradation. Additionally, antibody bound tau promoted the expression of cytokines, but the pattern of activation was not the same as that seen when glia were activated using LPS [124]. Because glial clearance is dependent on Fcγ receptor binding, this also makes the choice of isotype used important. Using two versions of DC8E8, which recognizes HXPGGG sequences in the microtubule binding region [192], a human IgG1 and IgG4, IgG1 was more effective in promoting uptake of antibody bound tau [193]. Similar to previous reports, tau uptake was reduced using an Fab fragment or blocking Fcγ II/III receptors [193]. However, because of the strong effect of tau alone on microglial cytokine production in this study, which was not further enhanced by the isotypes, it does not provide insight into effects of isotype on cytokine release and thereby possible side effects. In addition, microglia in culture are known to often behave very differently from in vivo, and neurotoxicity was not examined, which together makes it difficult to extrapolate these observations to a clinical situation. Data from α-synuclein models also show that antibodies promote microglial clearance via Fcγ receptor binding [194]. However, it should be noted that others have argued that effector functions are not necessary for efficacy of tau antibodies, and that activation of microglia by tau antibodies, and subsequent cytokine release may in fact be detrimental [69]. However, in a follow up study by this group, a tau antibody with effector function was effective in reducing soluble phospho-tau at a lower dose than its effectorless isotype and neither isotype was associated with any apparent in vivo toxicity [195]. Another study on this topic showed comparable effect of mouse IgG2a (closest to human IgG1) and mouse IgG1 (less effector function) on clearing several soluble and insoluble phospho-tau epitopes as quantified on western blots, although the latter isotype appeared to be more effective in clearing a particular phospho-tau epitope on immunostained brain sections [196].

Failures of Extracellular Antibodies in Clinical Trials:

The findings described above suggest that there is a role for targeting extracellular tau in the realm of tauopathy treatments. However, the recent failure of several clinical trials using antibodies that are reported to only work extracellularly show that it will not be enough. Tilavonemab (CN2–8E12 or ABBV-8E12 [58–60, 65–67]), Gosuranemab (BIIB092, BMS-986168, or IPN007 [62–64]), and Semorinemab (RO7105705, MTAU9937A, or RG6100 [68, 69]) are humanized IgG4 antibodies that bind to the N-terminus of tau, and in preclinical testing were shown to work outside the cell. The trial data has been discussed in detail elsewhere [8]. Briefly, none of the treatments raised safety concerns in initial human trials but failed to demonstrate functional improvements in AD and primary tauopathy patients, although a recent press release indicated that one of two primary endpoints, ADAS-Cog11, was met with Semorinemab in mild to moderate AD in a Phase 2 study [197]. There are several factors that both explain the mostly negative trial results with these three antibodies and support our long-held position that focusing solely on the extracellular pool is likely to be less effective than when also targeting intracellular tau.

The first of these concerns is the relatively low concentration of extracellular tau. Although the tau in the CSF and ISF increases in AD, this still represents a small fraction of the total tau present in the brain [198, 199]. Clearance of extracellular tau may impact spreading, but pathological tau disrupts a host of processes inside neurons. Some have hypothesized that there is an equilibrium between intracellular and secreted tau, and that pulling tau from the extracellular space might promote cells to release more, thus lowering the concentration of tau inside the cells. Reduced pathological tau has been shown in reports using extracellular antibodies, however these results have not translated to benefits in humans and is less efficient than targeting the intracellular tau directly. In addition, Tilavonemab and Gosuranemab were tested in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy, a primary tauopathy. Unlike AD, tau in the CSF is not increased in progressive supranuclear palsy or in other primary tauopathies [151–154, 200–202]. This suggests that extracellular tau is not a prominent feature in the pathogenesis or progression of primary tauopathies, and that targeting this pool of tau not only limits efficacy in AD, but even more so in other tauopathies.

It is well established that protein content in CSF differs from ISF, which is likely in large part due to degradation during the transition between these pools but it may partially be because of some barrier to movement between these different compartments [203]. Even with that in mind, extracellular tau can reasonably be considered to be less important for the progression of tau pathology in the primary tauopathies than in AD, because unlike AD, their CSF levels do not differ from controls. Without evidence of the contrary, any barriers to tau’s movement from ISF to CSF are likely to be comparable in these individuals.

Additionally, the specific epitopes targeted by these antibodies is of concern as well. While quantitative mass spectrometry showed that some short N-terminus tau peptides are present in the CSF of cognitively normal adults, those containing the two alternatively cleaved N terminus inserts are found at very low levels compared to the mid-range domains [204]. This suggests that any tau fragment containing N-terminus residues is very short or that tau containing exons 2 and 3 are not secreted. Similar findings were seen in the CSF of AD patients. Peptides comprising only the N- or C-terminus of the protein were found at lower levels compared to the middomain, with exon 2 containing peptides even more rare [151, 205]. Phospho-epitopes from the mid region were also detected in CSF from both cognitively normal and AD patients, while those from the N- and C-terminus were not [206]. The pattern of phospho-epitopes present also differed from that seen in the tissue itself, further highlighting the need for careful epitope selection. Interestingly, even though the microtubule binding domain (MTBD, tau amino acids 244–368) is required for tau aggregation and has been shown to be important for tau spreading [207–210], its levels in CSF are very low in all tauopathies as analyzed by mass spectrometry [151]. Likewise, ELISA analysis of full-length tau and various tau fragments in culture media in four different culture models revealed that tau containing MTBD is only a tiny fraction of extracellular tau [211]. However, the largest fraction of extracellular tau in the CSF is the mid domain of tau, roughly amino acids 150–250 [151, 204] and it is increased in AD compared to controls but not in other tauopathies [151]. Two recent entries into clinical trials target this middomain (Bepranemab against aa 235–250 and JNJ-63733657 against phospho-tau 217). The mouse version of Bepranemab has been shown to be more effective than some other ones in blocking seeding/spreading of exogenous brain derived pathological tau [98, 99], whereas the mouse version of E2814 targeting the MTBD had a modest effect on this endpoint in a different mouse study [95].

As stated above several reports showed that Fc receptor binding was necessary for uptake of tau into microglia. Further, removal of tau from the CNS via transport across the blood brain barrier may also require binding to neonatal Fc receptors. All the failed antibodies utilized a human IgG4 scaffold. The choice of IgG4 was presumably made because that subclass does not promote complement activation [212, 213] and would thus have a lower chance of producing adverse immune reactions. However, human IgG subclasses have different binding affinities for Fcγ receptors and induce different effects [214]. As mentioned above, in a direct comparison, human IgG1 antibody was more efficacious in promoting microglial phagocytosis of tau relative to IgG4. Antibodies that promoted microglial clearance also promoted activation of microglia. Because the pattern was not the same as that induced by bacterial proteins, this suggests that for antibody-mediated tau clearance, this specific type of activation may be beneficial rather than a potential problem. Uptake of the tau/antibody complexes occurred via the Fcγ II/III receptors, and the relatively lower affinity of IgG4 and its lack of binding to FcγIIIb receptors may contribute to that result. Choice of IgG also impacts several other properties, as they also differ in their stability [215], propensity to self-aggregate [216, 217], and rate of catabolism [218].

IgG4 also has a unique property, attributed to a serine at position 228 and arginine at position 409, which can destabilize interactions between the heavy chains and result in the formation of half antibodies [219–221]. Endogenous IgG4 can form heterodimers in vivo, and this can be seen with administered antibodies as well [222, 223]. This process can be prevented using directed mutations to stabilize the antibody [215, 224, 225]. However, this is not always done before use in humans, as this dissociation and exchange has been seen in patients using FDA approved immunotherapies [222]. This recombination has been shown to impact antibody efficacy in a cancer model when other IgGs are present [226]. Further, recombination can impact efficacy by altering antibody charge. Changes in antibody charge can impact all aspects of antibody behavior including Fc receptor binding, target affinity, clearance rates, and the specificity of cellular uptake [42, 227–236]. It would be informative to see published a thorough characterization of these features for the humanized antibodies that are in clinical trials including those that have failed. Such analyses may provide an important insight into if/how these features relate to clinical efficacy.

It can be argued that using IgG4 instead of IgG1 is a safer approach because microglia over-activation via IgG1-mediated phagocytosis of tau may be detrimental. Specifically, microglial depletion has been reported to reduce tau seeding and tau-mediated neurodegeneration [237–239], and microglial activation has been linked to tau propagation [240]. In contrast, microglia ablation has also been shown to enhance tau seeding and spreading whereas activated microglia has the opposite effect [241]. Given the beneficial and detrimental effects that microglia can have on Alzheimer’s and tau pathology, further research on this topic is clearly warranted [242].

The results from clinical trials show that the approach used to target pathological tau in these studies may not always be well suited to the conditions found in AD and other tauopathies. While extracellular tau is relevant to disease through the spread of pathology, it is likely to be insufficient on its own. Additionally, the specifics of the failed antibodies, epitope and isotype selection, may also not be ideal for achieving the goal of binding and eliminating extracellular tau. All of this highlights the need for further study regarding what properties impact antibody efficacy as well as additional basic research on tau secretion. We argue as well that antibodies targeting intracellular tau can impact tau spreading by reducing tau burden inside neurons and thereby its release.

Intracellular Mechanisms

Because the majority of pathological tau is inside the cell, the ideal immunotherapy would be able to target this pool in addition to extracellular tau. There was initially resistance to the idea that tau antibodies could enter neurons at all. However, our group and others have shown that tau mAbs or antibody fragments, can be internalized and colocalize with tau in cells [42, 43, 46, 108, 118, 119, 122, 129, 143, 145, 243–245]. Intracellular antibodies can reduce pathological tau load and improve functional outcomes in cell and animal models, while blocking their uptake reduces efficacy. This has been expanded on by other groups, not only in tauopathy models, but also in models of other proteinopathies as well. For example, neuronal uptake of antibodies has been observed in models of Parkinson’s disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [246–251]. Neurons have also been shown to take up auto-antibodies or circulating IgGs [252–260]. While auto antibodies can be detrimental to neurons, they provide further evidence that uptake is possible. This ability is likely an important feature of most if not all cells as part of the immune system, for example to neutralize viruses.

It is in many ways understandable why pharmaceutical companies were initially reluctant to focus on intracellular efficacy of antibodies because of the many unknowns about their mechanism of action and possible side effects. However, these concerns do not seem to have been warranted. We and others have not seen any toxicity linked to such tau antibodies. In our hands and others, these antibodies are mostly confined to the endosomal-lysosomal system associating with tau that has already been targeted for degradation [42, 43, 108, 118, 119, 122, 129, 134, 244]. Other groups have reported similar endosomal-lysosomal location of antibodies against α-synuclein and TDP43 [247, 248, 251]. Chronic treatment with tau immunogens or tau antibodies typically does not affect levels of normal tau, presumably because they have minimal if any interaction with normal tau as it is not in vesicles targeted for clearance [43, 46, 48, 120, 129, 143, 144, 261]. For those antibodies that may escape the vesicles, any associated clearance of normal tau would appear to be transient based on the outcome of the chronic studies. Even if there was some clearance of physiological tau, it is unlikely to be detrimental since tau knock-out mice are relatively normal, indicating that other microtubule-associated protein can take over tau’s function [262]. In the same vein, it is unlikely that tau antibodies will acutely affect larger tau filaments and tangles in the cytosol as those are hard to clear. We have reported that the acute effect of tau antibodies is to clear soluble phospho-tau whereas insoluble tau is not affected unless the treatment is chronic [43, 46, 48, 143, 144, 261, 263]. By preventing further buildup of the substrate for tangles, the equilibrium is shifted towards their gradual clearance by more subtle mechanisms.

Antibody Uptake into Neurons:

Antibodies can be taken up via specific Fcγ receptor-mediated or bulk endocytosis. Although their existence was controversial initially, it has been shown in multiple reports that neurons and glia express Fcγ receptors on the cell surface throughout the nervous system [264–271]. In addition, neurons express another type of Fc molecule, tripartite motif containing 21 (TRIM21), a high affinity cytosolic receptor. Our group has shown that Fcγ receptors are responsible for the majority of antibody uptake, and we and others reported that blocking this uptake can reduce efficacy in preventing tau-induced toxicity and seeding [43, 108, 118]. Using Fcγ blockers also inhibits the uptake of α-synuclein antibodies in culture [272]. Others have shown that in cells lacking surface Fcγ receptors, the internal TRIM21 can bind to tau-antibody complexes [243]. We have also shown that non-specific bulkmediated endocytosis contributes to a minority of uptake for whole IgGs [118]. This mechanism is of greater importance to the internalization of therapeutic antibody fragments which lack the Fc binding portion of the molecule. These fragments include Fabs, single chain variable fragments (scFvs) and single domain antibodies (sdAbs, also called nanobodies or VHHs) which comprise one whole Fab region, one heavy and light chain variable domain bound by a linker, and a single heavy chain variable region, respectively.

There are several factors that influence the extent of antibody uptake including charge, isotype, and size. Antibody charge impacts nearly all aspects of antibody function for both whole IgGs and antibody fragments. We have shown that changing antibody charge through human chimerization greatly increases its isoelectric point, and that this decreased its neuronal uptake and altered tau binding despite no changes being made to the variable regions [42]. Indeed, other groups have shown that charge affects Fc receptor binding [228, 229], rates of catabolism [273–275], endosomal sorting [229], as well as the extent, specificity and cell type of uptake [232, 273]. As discussed above, for whole antibodies the choice of isotype impacts binding to Fcγ receptors, which also impacts which cell types are favored as well, the overall level of uptake, and whether complement is activated. Decreasing the size of antibodies, through the use of scFv or sdAbs, could improve blood brain barrier penetrance and increase uptake via bulk-mediated endocytosis. However, antibody fragments are cleared much faster than whole antibodies. Concerns regarding short half-life can be bypassed by expressing the scFvs or sdAbs directly in neurons or other cell types. This can be achieved through transfection with adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) which continue to be improved for human use. This approach has been used successfully to express the PHF1 and CP13 tau antibodies in tauopathy mice resulting in robust therapeutic benefits demonstrating its feasibility [123, 276].

Either internalized, or internally expressed, antibodies or antibody fragments have the potential to prevent the toxicity caused by intracellular tau pathology. Tau has been shown to induce aberrant calcium homeostasis, thus its normalization could improve neuronal function. Antibodies may prevent the formation of or promote the disassembly of tau aggregates either in the cytosol or endosomal/lysosomal system. Binding to tau in endosome could prevent the permeabilization of vesicle membranes and promote clearance. Furthermore, antibody-mediated disassembly of tau aggregates in lysosomes should facilitate access of lysosomal enzymes to digest tau. Additionally, new techniques have been developed that combine immunotherapy with other molecules to facilitate digestion or promote dephosphorylation.

Intracellular Tau Clearance:

Under normal conditions, the level of tau protein in neurons is maintained through the balance of protein synthesis and degradation. Tau can be cleared through either macroautophagy, chaperone mediated autophagy (CMA), or endosomal microautophagy (eMi). In AD, these protein clearance mechanisms are disrupted (extensively reviewed in [277, 278]). Induction of autophagy in early disease may occur as a response to tau pathology, however later this becomes pathological itself when lysosomes fail to fuse or completely degrade their contents, leading to a buildup of organelles and partially digested proteins. In addition to resulting in a buildup of damaged or pathological proteins, lysosomal membranes can serve as a site of increased tau polymerization. Further, decreased lysosomal function in AD and higher numbers of multivesicular bodies can lead to increased vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane and promote tau release into the extracellular space.

Tau is not only a substrate for the different forms of autophagy but can itself impact protein clearance. Pathological tau can inhibit both the initiation of macroautophagy and the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes [279]. Tau fragments can prevent the entry of other proteins into the lysosome, and surface bound tau inhibits its function [280, 281]. Proteasomal function is negatively correlated with levels of pathological tau in AD brain, and exposure to tau has been shown to reduce proteasome activity [282, 283]. ESCRT proteins, which are involved in both macroautophagy and eMi, are downregulated when tau is overexpressed [284]. Tau can block the uptake of peptides into MVBs and inhibit vesicle formation [285]. The Hsc70 chaperone necessary for CMA and eMi can also be sequestered in tau aggregates [286]. Additionally, tau can promote the permeabilization of endosomal and lysosomal membranes, allowing the escape of partially degraded tau back into the cytosol [287–289]. Thus, tau can perpetuate its own pathology through its negative effect on its clearance. Immunotherapy has the potential to impact tau pathology by neutralizing tau in the cytosol or endosomal/lysosomal system and facilitating its digestion.

Our group and others have shown that antibodies taken up into or expressed in neurons colocalize with pathological proteins in the endosomal/lysosomal system [119, 122, 134, 244, 247, 248, 251] (Figure 1). Binding to this pool of tau may prevent the pathological association with the internal membranes, improving the stability of endosomes/lysosomes and therefore prevent tau’s escape back into the cytosol. This would not only improve the clearance of tau, but potentially all the other proteins found in the vesicles as well. Additionally, it would prevent the further damage caused by leaked pathological tau. Antibodies which can promote the disaggregation of tau polymers could also make it easier to break down the larger filaments and allow lysosomes to fully digest them.

Internalized antibodies can promote the removal of tau from the cytosol through binding to the TRIM21 Fc receptor (Figure 1). TRIM21 colocalized with antibody bound tau in cells and promoted its clearance through the proteasome and molecular unfoldase [243]. Similar results were seen using a whole IgG recognizing TDP43, a protein involved in both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. The antibody was internalized both in cultured cells and in vivo and bound to TDP43 and TRIM21 inside the cell. In addition to potentially promoting proteasomal clearance, antibodies were also found colocalized with endosomes and lysosomes [251].

In addition to easing clearance by preventing the formation of polymers, or neutralizing intracellular tau, intracellular antibodies can also promote tau degradation in more direct ways. Several strategies have also been developed that utilize antibodies or combine tau antibodies with other molecules to directly promote antibody mediated clearance of tau through the ubiquitin-proteasomal and autophagic systems.

Enhancing Intracellular Tau Clearance:

Intracellular expressed tau scFvs fused to ubquitin containing single point mutations can be used to direct tau to either the proteasome or autphagosome/lysosome system [290]. Poly ubiquitination at Lys48 or Lys63 will result in favoring the proteasome or lysosome respectively (Lys48 reveiwed in [291], Lys63 [292, 293]. Mutating Lys63 promotes poly ubiquitination at Lys48 and thus proteasomal clearance, and vice versa. In culture models both types were able to reduce intracellular tau levels. However, in transgenic mice only the proteasome-promoting antibody was effective [290]. ScFv expression reduced tau levels in multiple areas compared to the contralateral non-expressing hippocampus in animals where the scFv containing AAV was adminestered either prior to or following the development of tau pathology [290].

Increasing target ubiquitination and proteasomal clearance is also the goal of proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTAC, see Figure 2). These hetero bivalent complexes are comprised of a target binder, a short linker and E3 ligase recruiting molecule. By bringing the target and ligase together, the protein of interest is ubiquitinated and targeted for clearance. Published results targeting tau have used small molecule tau ligands such as tubulin or the PET imaging agent T-807. These molecules have been tested in HEK293, SH-SY5Y and neurons derived from human tauopathy patients [294–297]. In each case, the PROTAC molecules entered the cells and decreased tau levels. Both intracerebroventricular and peripheral administration of one PROTAC, C004019, reduced tau levels, prevented the loss of dendritic arborization, and improved cognition [294]. These results demonstrate the potential of the system, and in recent studies sdAbs have been utlized as the target binding region against a variety of proteins [298–300]. This suggests that tau sdAbs could also be utilized effectively to target a wider range of tau epitopes, and with greater specificity than the binders used before.

Proteasome targeting immunotherapy strategies have also been employed in other disorders as well. AAV mediated expression of an N-terminus huntingtin scFv reduced protein levels in cells and drosophila, but its efficacy in transgenic mice was transient. To improve antibody function, the Proline (P), Glutamic Acid (E) or Aspartic Acid (D), Serine (S), and Threonine (T), proteasome targeting motif from the mouse ornithine decarboxylase enzyme was fused to the scFv [301]. Addition of the motif resulted in enhanced clearance of an N-terminus huntingtin peptide [301]. This same PEST sequence was fused to two different synuclein sdAbs, recognizing the non amyloid component, a hydrophilic region involved in aggregation, and the C-terminus [302]. Both fused sdAbs reduced synuclein induced toxicity when expressed in cells, and in vivo following AAV injection. In both cases the sdAb targeting the non amyloid region was most efficacious [302, 303].

A recent publication from Sun et al described a more complex antibody based therapy, the tauopathy-homing and autophagy-activating nanoassembly (THN) [304]. The assembly contains AT8, a tau antibody recognizing phosphorylated Ser202/Thr205, autophagy promoting PEGylated cerium oxide nanoparticles, and magnetic mesoporous silica nanoparticles. Cerium oxide nanoparticles are widely used in industrial applications, but were recently found to promote autophagic clearance of protein aggregates [305]. Following their addition to culture media, THN particles could be seen in the autophagosomes of SH-SY5Y cells. The complexes promoted the autophagic clearance of tau, and prevented the toxicity associated with exogenous PHFs. Following injections into the brain, THNs entered neurons, colocalized with pathological tau, and improved memory deficits in rats pretreated with okadaic acid to induce tau phosphorylation and aggregation [304].

These methods demonstrate the potential versatility of immunotherapy. Fusion with other molecules can enhance clearance while tau antibodies allow for the targeting of specific epitopes. Because of the complexity of the autophagy pathways, and the fact that their components often have multiple functions, the specificity of antibody based therapies represents an improvement over the use of broad autophagy modifiers to clear tau.

Enhancing tau dephosphorylation by similar means is another attractive approach. Tau phosphorylation is one of the earliest events in AD and impacts microtubule binding and axonal transport, propensity to assemble, and localization. Reducing it has long been a goal of AD therapeutic development. Although tau is phosphorylated by multiple kinases, over 70% of dephosphorylation is performed by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). To leverage this fact, Zheng et al. developed a DEPhosphorylation TArgeting Chimera (DEPTAC) designed to bring tau into proximity with PP2A. The molecule is comprised of a tau binding peptide, linker, and PP2A binding peptide, with an additional motif to increase cell penetrance [306]. Transgenic animals receiving repeated DEPTAC infusions showed reduced pathology, with improvements in synaptic functioning and cognition. This promising new system could be adapted to integrate tau sdAbs as the target binding component much as the PROTAC system discussed above has been.

Normalization of Calcium Homeostasis

Assessing functional improvements by tau antibodies has typically relied on behavioral studies. While such analyses are very useful, those do not provide insight into the mechanisms involved for effective therapies. Recent advances in two-photon calcium imaging in awake active mice provide a complementary functional analyses with the potential for mechanistic insight into how the therapy works.

Among their other deleterious effects in disease, both Aβ and tau have been shown to disrupt calcium homeostasis. Exposure to Aβ in AD can lead to greater calcium influx, which in turn promotes the phosphorylation of tau, thus making it more predisposed to dissociate from microtubules and form aggregates. Tau pathology, either resulting from Aβ or on its own, can then promote calcium dyshomeostasis in several ways. Tau has been shown to alter calcium influx and efflux [307–310], the distribution of calcium between organelles [311–313], and calcium pump activity [314]. Our group and others have detected abnormal calcium signaling in transgenic mice and in neurons expressing or exposed to pathological tau [127, 309, 310, 315–318]. It should be noted that other groups did not see altered calcium activity in tau mice, possibly in part because they were examined during lower neuronal activity [319, 320]. Comparison between studies can be difficult due to the differences in models, experimental conditions and quantitation methods. However, in our experiments, acute clearance of soluble phospho-tau by a tau antibody that works both intra- and extracellularly normalized to a large extent calcium activity in neurons [127].

Conclusions

Multiple clinical trials are currently ongoing in tauopathy patients. There are reasons to be hopeful that some of these will be efficacious, in contrast to those that have failed that primarily targeted the N-terminus of tau. The active immunization trials will generate polyclonal antibodies that differ in their exact epitope, isotype and neuronal uptake because of different isoelectric points, which may enhance overall efficacy. For the passive immunization trials, antibody humanization can substantially alter its isoelectric point and thereby neuronal uptake as discussed above [42]. There are no reports on this important issue for the humanized tau antibodies in clinical trials. If we assume that this modification has not changed the properties of the original mouse antibody, two of the antibodies reported to work outside neurons [95, 124, 182], E2814 and Lu AF 87908, targeting the repeat region of tau and C-terminus phosphoepitope, respectively, are of the IgG1 isotype, which should promote microglial clearance of the tau-antibody complex . JNJ-63733657 and UCB0107 target the mid-domain region of the tau molecule, a more prevalent extracellular epitope compared to the N-terminus of tau. However, UCB0107 is being examined not only in AD patients who have increased CSF tau levels but also in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy in which levels of extracellular tau are comparable to controls and thereby unlikely to be involved in progression of tau pathology. Perhaps for that reason, this trial has now been put on hold. Clinical testing is also being carried out on PNT001which targets cis-pThr231 tau, whose mouse counterpart is taken up by neurons in preclinical studies [108].

We have argued that targeting both extra- and intracellular tau is necessary for maximal antibody efficacy. Mulitple groups working with different disease models have shown that uptake into neurons is possible for whole antibodies, and have demonstrated the potential of antibody fragment gene therapy. This also suggests that selecting candidates for development should focus not just on affinity for tau, but also on properties that maximize neuronal uptake. Indeed, we have found that lower affinity antibodies can be more efficacious than those with higher binding [43], but this is likely to be epitope dependent. Rather, optimizing antibody charge and choosing isotypes that bind to FcγII/III receptors is likely to yield better results. An additional concern regarding antibody efficacy is how it can be impacted by the move from preclinical model systems to human trials. We have shown that human chimerization drastically reduced the efficacy of one of our tau antibodies, primarily because it prevented its neuronal uptake but also to some extent because it enhanced its affinity for tau, even though the amino acid sequences of the binding regions were not altered [42]. Antibodies should be retested following humanization and possibly further modified to ensure that they retain the properties that make them efficacious. In the case of fragments utilized as intracelluar gene therapies, the choice of epitope will be important as the prevalence changes over time and varies by disease. Ensuring sufficient uptake and expression of viral vectors into the central nervous system is not a trivial challenge, and there is a risk that patients will develop antibodies against the AAV vector itself. More research is necessary to fully clarify which antibody properties are important for efficacy, and the mechanisms by which they function. The immense cost associated with AD and related tauopathies as well as the time and effort required to bring vaccines/antibodies to trial highlight the need to clarify the optimal antigen/antibody profile for the most efficacious outcome for functional improvements.

Acknowledgements:

Funding from the National Institutes of Health grants R01 AG032611, R01 NS077239, RF1 NS120488 and R21 AG069475.

Figure 1: Mechanism of action of tau antibody therapy.

Tau antibodies can consist of whole antibodies (150 kDa), and antibody fragments such as Fabs (50 kDa), single-chain variable fragments (scFvs, 25 kDa), and single-domain antibodies (sdAbs, 13 kDa). These could target tau intra- and/or extracellularly. Pathological tau mostly resides within neurons. A much smaller pool of tau aggregates is also found extracellularly after being secreted from living neurons or released from dead neurons. Some tau antibodies primarily work extracellularly as they are not ready taken up into neurons, presumably because of an unfavorable electrical charge. Outside the cell, antibodies could sequester tau aggregates, interfere with their assembly and promote microglial phagocytosis, which collectively would prevent the spread of tau pathology between neurons. In another scenario, some antibodies can easily be taken up into neurons, presumably via receptor-mediated and bulk endocytosis, and have been shown to work both intra- and extracellularly. Within the neuron, these antibodies can bind to tau aggregates within the endosomal-lysosomal system and facilitate their disassembly, leading to better access of lysosomal enzymes and thereby their degradation. Some antibodies can enter the cytosol from endosomes, bind to misfolded tau there and promote proteasomal clearance of the antibody-tau complex or sequester cytosolic tau aggregates and prevent their release from the neuron. Once the proteasomal tau clearance pathway has been saturated, misfolded tau would start to aggregate in the cytosol and then be encapsulated in autophagosomes targeted for lysosomal clearance. These autophagosomes could fuse with endosomes containing tau antibodies with or without tau aggregates. If the lysosomal clearance becomes saturated, some of the accumulating lysosomes will burst and their tau aggregates can then seed further aggregation resulting in a tangle formation within the neuron. The most efficacious antibodies should target more than one tau clearance pathway and/or pool of tau. The antibody fragments, in particular the smallest ones, sdAbs, have potential as diagnostic imaging agents and for gene therapy through transfection with adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) but their half-lives are too short for standard peripheral therapy. Tau pathology is sometimes found in other cell types than neurons, in particular astrocytes, and presumably similar mechanism of action of the antibodies could be occurring in those cells.

Figure 2: sdAb- or scFv-based proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTAC).

These hetero bivalent complexes are comprised of a target binder (sdAb or scFv), a short linker and E3 ligase recruiting molecule, which would put the target and E3 ligase into proximity, and trigger proteasomal degradation.

Abbreviations: POI =Protein of interest (tau). Ub = ubiquitin, E2 = E2 ligase. E3 = E3 ligase.

Conflict of Interest:

EMS is an inventor on patents on tau immunotherapies and related diagnostics that are assigned to New York University. Some of these are licensed to H. Lundbeck A/S.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References

1. Decourt B , , Critical Appraisal of Amyloid Lowering Agents in AD. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep, 2021. 21 (8 ): p. 39.34110536
2. Plotkin SS and Cashman NR , Passive immunotherapies targeting Abeta and tau in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Dis, 2020. 144 : p. 105010.
3. Penninkilampi R , Brothers HM , and Eslick GD , Pharmacological Agents Targeting gamma-Secretase Increase Risk of Cancer and Cognitive Decline in Alzheimer’s Disease Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Alzheimers Dis, 2016. 53 (4 ): p. 1395–404.27392862
4. Wolfe MS , Probing Mechanisms and Therapeutic Potential of gamma-Secretase in Alzheimer’s Disease. Molecules, 2021. 26 (2 ).
5. Hampel H , , The beta-Secretase BACE1 in Alzheimer’s Disease. Biol Psychiatry, 2021. 89 (8 ): p. 745–756.32223911
6. Congdon EE and Sigurdsson EM , Tau-targeting therapies for Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Neurol, 2018. 14 : p. 399–415.29895964
7. Sandusky-Beltran LA and Sigurdsson EM , Tau immunotherapies: Lessons learned, current status and future considerations. Neuropharmacology, 2020. 175 : p. 108104.
8. Ji C and Sigurdsson EM , Current Status of Clinical Trials on Tau Immunotherapies. Drugs, 2021. 81 (10 ): p. 1135–1152.34101156
9. Sigurdsson EM , Tau Immunotherapies for Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Tauopathies: Progress and Potential Pitfalls. J Alzheimers Dis, 2018. 64 (s1 ): p. S555–S565.29865056
10. Neve RL , , Identification of cDNA clones for the human microtubule-associated protein tau and chromosomal localization of the genes for tau and microtubule-associated protein 2. Brain Res, 1986. 387 (3 ): p. 271–80.3103857
11. Goedert M , , Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron, 1989. 3 (4 ): p. 519–26.2484340
12. Goedert M , , Cloning and sequencing of the cDNA encoding an isoform of microtubule-associated protein tau containing four tandem repeats: differential expression of tau protein mRNAs in human brain. EMBO J, 1989. 8 (2 ): p. 393–9.2498079
13. Himmler A , , Tau consists of a set of proteins with repeated C-terminal microtubule-binding domains and variable N-terminal domains. Mol Cell Biol, 1989. 9 (4 ): p. 1381–8.2498649
14. Guo T , Noble W , and Hanger DP , Roles of tau protein in health and disease. Acta Neuropathol, 2017. 133 (5 ): p. 665–704.28386764
15. Tapia-Rojas C , , It’s all about tau. Prog Neurobiol, 2019. 175 : p. 54–76.30605723
16. Wang Y and Mandelkow E , Tau in physiology and pathology. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2016. 17 (1 ): p. 5–21.26631930
17. Ittner LM , , Dendritic function of tau mediates amyloid-beta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Cell, 2010. 142 (3 ): p. 387–97.20655099
18. Alquezar C , Arya S , and Kao AW , Tau Post-translational Modifications: Dynamic Transformers of Tau Function, Degradation, and Aggregation. Front Neurol, 2020. 11 : p. 595532.
19. Grundke-Iqbal I , , Abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1986. 83 (13 ): p. 4913–7.3088567
20. Ksiezak-Reding H , Liu WK , and Yen SH , Phosphate analysis and dephosphorylation of modified tau associated with paired helical filaments. Brain Res, 1992. 597 (2 ): p. 209–19.1472994
21. Noble W , , The importance of tau phosphorylation for neurodegenerative diseases. Front Neurol, 2013. 4 : p. 83.23847585
22. Augustinack JC , , Specific tau phosphorylation sites correlate with severity of neuronal cytopathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol, 2002. 103 (1 ): p. 26–35.11837744
23. Luna-Munoz J , , Earliest stages of tau conformational changes are related to the appearance of a sequence of specific phospho-dependent tau epitopes in Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis, 2007. 12 (4 ): p. 365–75.18198423
24. Kimura T , , Sequential changes of tau-site-specific phosphorylation during development of paired helical filaments. Dementia, 1996. 7 (4 ): p. 177–81.8835879
25. Yoshida H and Goedert M , Sequential phosphorylation of tau protein by cAMP-dependent protein kinase and SAPK4/p38delta or JNK2 in the presence of heparin generates the AT100 epitope. J Neurochem, 2006. 99 (1 ): p. 154–64.16987243
26. Li T , , Cyclin-dependent protein kinase 5 primes microtubule-associated protein tau site-specifically for glycogen synthase kinase 3beta. Biochemistry, 2006. 45 (10 ): p. 3134–45.16519508
27. Li T and Paudel HK , Glycogen synthase kinase 3beta phosphorylates Alzheimer’s disease-specific Ser396 of microtubule-associated protein tau by a sequential mechanism. Biochemistry, 2006. 45 (10 ): p. 3125–33.16519507
28. Alonso A , , Hyperphosphorylation induces self-assembly of tau into tangles of paired helical filaments/straight filaments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2001. 98 (12 ): p. 6923–8.11381127
29. Cotman CW , , The role of caspase cleavage of tau in Alzheimer disease neuropathology. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 2005. 64 (2 ): p. 104–12.15751224
30. Zhao X , , Caspase-2 cleavage of tau reversibly impairs memory. Nat Med, 2016. 22 (11 ): p. 1268–1276.27723722
31. Jadhav S , , Truncated tau deregulates synaptic markers in rat model for human tauopathy. Front Cell Neurosci, 2015. 9 : p. 24.25755633
32. Berry RW , , Inhibition of tau polymerization by its carboxy-terminal caspase cleavage fragment. Biochemistry, 2003. 42 (27 ): p. 8325–31.12846581
33. Gamblin TC , , Caspase cleavage of tau: linking amyloid and neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2003. 100 (17 ): p. 10032–7.12888622
34. Perez MJ , , Caspase-Cleaved Tau Impairs Mitochondrial Dynamics in Alzheimer’s Disease. Mol Neurobiol, 2018. 55 (2 ): p. 1004–1018.28084594
35. Min SW , , Acetylation of tau inhibits its degradation and contributes to tauopathy. Neuron, 2010. 67 (6 ): p. 953–66.20869593
36. Wang JZ , Grundke-Iqbal I , and Iqbal K , Glycosylation of microtubule-associated protein tau: an abnormal posttranslational modification in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Med, 1996. 2 (8 ): p. 871–5.8705855
37. Grundke-Iqbal I , , Microtubule-associated protein tau. A component of Alzheimer paired helical filaments. J Biol Chem, 1986. 261 (13 ): p. 6084–9.3084478
38. Kidd M , Paired helical filaments in electron microscopy of Alzheimer’s disease. Nature, 1963. 197 : p. 192–3.
39. Meraz-Rios MA , , Tau oligomers and aggregation in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem, 2010. 112 (6 ): p. 1353–67.19943854
40. Arima K , Ultrastructural characteristics of tau filaments in tauopathies: immune-electron microscopic demonstration of tau filaments in tauopathies. Neuropathology, 2006. 26 (5 ): p. 475–83.17080728
41. Fa M , , Extracellular Tau Oligomers Produce An Immediate Impairment of LTP and Memory. Sci Rep, 2016. 6 : p. 19393.26786552
42. Congdon EE , Chukwu JE , Shamir DB , Deng J , Ujla D , Sait HBR , Neubert TA , Kong XP , Sigurdsson EM , Tau antibody chimerization alters its charge and binding, thereby reduces its cellular uptake and efficacy. eBioMedicine, 2019. 42 : p. 157–173.30910484
43. Congdon EE , , Affinity of Tau antibodies for solubilized pathological Tau species but not their immunogen or insoluble Tau aggregates predicts in vivo and ex vivo efficacy. Mol Neurodegener, 2016. 11 (1 ): p. 62–86.27578006
44. Shafiei SS , Guerrero-Munoz MJ , and Castillo-Carranza DL , Tau Oligomers: Cytotoxicity, Propagation, and Mitochondrial Damage. Front Aging Neurosci, 2017. 9 : p. 83.28420982
45. Asuni AA , Quartermain D , Sigurdsson EM , Tau-based immunotherapy for dementia. Alzheimer Dement, 2006. 2 (Suppl. ): p. S40–41.
46. Asuni AA , , Immunotherapy targeting pathological tau conformers in a tangle mouse model reduces brain pathology with associated functional improvements. J Neurosci, 2007. 27 (34 ): p. 9115–29.17715348
47. Boutajangout A , Ingadottir J , Davies P , Sigurdsson EM , Passive tau immuntherapy diminishes functional decline and clears tau aggregates in a mouse model of tauopathy. Alzheimer Dement, 2010. 6 (Suppl. ): p. S578.
48. Boutajangout A , , Passive immunization targeting pathological phospho-tau protein in a mouse model reduces functional decline and clears tau aggregates from the brain. J Neurochem, 2011. 118 (4 ): p. 658–67.21644996
49. Bittar A , Bhatt N , and Kayed R , Advances and considerations in AD tau-targeted immunotherapy. Neurobiol Dis, 2020. 134 : p. 104707.
50. Colin M , , From the prion-like propagation hypothesis to therapeutic strategies of anti-tau immunotherapy. Acta Neuropathol, 2020. 139 (1 ): p. 3–25.31686182
51. Novak P , , Safety and immunogenicity of the tau vaccine AADvac1 in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial. Lancet Neurol, 2017. 16 (2 ): p. 123–134.27955995
52. Novak P , , FUNDAMANT: an interventional 72-week phase 1 follow-up study of AADvac1, an active immunotherapy against tau protein pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther, 2018. 10 (1 ): p. 108.30355322
53. Novak P , K. B., Katina S , Schmidt R , Scheltens P , Kontsekova E , Ropele S , Fialova L , Kramberger M , Paulenka-Ivanovova N , Smisek M , Hanes J , Stevens E , Kovac A , Sutovsky S , Parrak V , Koson P , Prcina M , Galba J , Cente M , Hromadka T , Filipcik P , Piestansky J , Samcova M , Prenn-Gologranc C , Sivak R , Froelich L , Fresser M , Rakusa M , Harrison J , Hort J , Otto M , Tosun D , Ondrus M , Winblad B , Novak M , Zilka N , ADAMANT: a placebo-controlled randomized phase 2 study of AADvac1, an active immunotherapy against pathological tau in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature Aging, 2021. 1 : p. 521–534.
54. Rosenmann H , , Tauopathy-like abnormalities and neurologic deficits in mice immunized with neuronal tau protein. Arch Neurol, 2006. 63 (10 ): p. 1459–67.17030663
55. Rozenstein-Tsalkovich L , , Repeated immunization of mice with phosphorylatedtau peptides causes neuroinflammation. Exp Neurol, 2013. 248 : p. 451–6.23876516
56. Dai CL , , Passive immunization targeting the N-terminal projection domain of tau decreases tau pathology and improves cognition in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer disease and tauopathies. J Neural Transm (Vienna), 2015. 122 (4 ): p. 607–17.25233799
57. Subramanian S , Savanur G , and Madhavadas S , Passive immunization targeting the N-terminal region of phosphorylated tau (residues 68–71) improves spatial memory in okadaic acid induced tauopathy model rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 2017. 483 (1 ): p. 585–589.27998769
58. Yanamandra K , , Anti-tau antibodies that block tau aggregate seeding in vitro markedly decrease pathology and improve cognition in vivo. Neuron, 2013. 80 (2 ): p. 402–14.24075978
59. Funk KE , , Distinct Therapeutic Mechanisms of Tau Antibodies: PROMOTING MICROGLIAL CLEARANCE VERSUS BLOCKING NEURONAL UPTAKE. J Biol Chem, 2015. 290 (35 ): p. 21652–62.26126828
60. Kfoury N , , Trans-cellular propagation of Tau aggregation by fibrillar species. J Biol Chem, 2012. 287 (23 ): p. 19440–51.22461630
61. Sopko R , , Characterization of tau binding by gosuranemab. Neurobiol Dis, 2020. 146 : p. 105120.
62. Dam T , , Safety and efficacy of anti-tau monoclonal antibody gosuranemab in progressive supranuclear palsy: a phase 2, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Nat Med, 2021. 27 (8 ): p. 1451–1457.34385707
63. Qureshi IA , , A randomized, single ascending dose study of intravenous BIIB092 in healthy participants. Alzheimers Dement (N Y), 2018. 4 : p. 746–755.30581980
64. Therapeutics Alzforum , Gosuranemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/gosuranemab, Acessed 2021.
65. Hoglinger GU , , Safety and efficacy of tilavonemab in progressive supranuclear palsy: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol, 2021. 20 (3 ): p. 182–192.33609476
66. West T e.a., Safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of ABBV-8E12, a humanized anti-tau monoclonal antibody, in a Phase I, singel ascending dose, placebo-controlled study in subjects with progressive supranuclear palsy. J Prev Alz Dis, 2016. 3 (1 ): p. 285.
67. Therapeutics Alzforum , Tilavonemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/tilavonemab, Accessed 2021.
68. Therapeutics Alzforum , Semorinemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/semorinemab, Accessed 2021.
69. Lee SH , , Antibody-Mediated Targeting of Tau In Vivo Does Not Require Effector Function and Microglial Engagement. Cell Rep, 2016. 16 (6 ): p. 1690–700.27475227
70. US National Library of Medicine, NCT02658916. clinicalTrials.gov, 2016.
71. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03068468. clinicalTrials.gov, 2017.
72. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03658135. clinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
73. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03391765. clinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
74. US National Library of Medicine, NCT02985879. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2016.
75. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03744546. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
76. US National Library of Medicine, NCT02880956. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2016.
77. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03413319. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
78. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03712787. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
79. US National Library of Medicine, NCT02820896. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2016.
80. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03289143. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2017.
81. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03828747. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2019.
82. Dai CL , , Tau passive immunization inhibits not only tau but also Abeta pathology. Alzheimers Res Ther, 2017. 9 (1 ): p. 1.28073379
83. Verelst J , , A Novel Tau Antibody Detecting the First Amino-Terminal Insert Reveals Conformational Differences Among Tau Isoforms. Front Mol Biosci, 2020. 7 : p. 48.32296712
84. Corsetti V , , Passive immunotherapy for N-truncated tau ameliorates the cognitive deficits in two mouse Alzheimer’s disease models. Brain Commun, 2020. 2 (1 ): p. fcaa039.
85. Nobuhara CK , , Tau Antibody Targeting Pathological Species Blocks Neuronal Uptake and Interneuron Propagation of Tau in Vitro. Am J Pathol, 2017. 187 (6 ): p. 13991–412.
86. Therapeutics Alzforum , BIIB076. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/biib076, Accessed 2021.
87. Therapeutics Alzforum , JNJ-63733657. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/jnj-63733657, Accessed 2021.
88. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03375697. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2017.
89. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03689153. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
90. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03605082. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
91. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03464227. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
92. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04185415. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2019.
93. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04619420. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2020.
94. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04867616. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2021.
95. Roberts M , , Pre-clinical characterisation of E2814, a high-affinity antibody targeting the microtubule-binding repeat domain of tau for passive immunotherapy in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2020. 8 (1 ): p. 13.32019610
96. Horie K , , CSF tau microtubule binding region identifies tau tangle and clinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2021. 144 (2 ): p. 515–527.33283854
97. Horie K , Takahashi E , Aoyama M , Nakatani Y , Roberts M , Staddon J , de Silva R , Koyama A , Quantification of the tau microtubule binding region (Mtbr) in cerebrospinal fluid and subsequent validation of target engagement assay for E2814, a novel anti-tau therapeutic antibody. Alzheimer’s Association International Conference, 2019. July 2019: p. P4–696.
98. Albert M , , Prevention of tau seeding and propagation by immunotherapy with a central tau epitope antibody. Brain, 2019. 142 (6 ): p. 1736–1750.31038156
99. Courade JP , , Epitope determines efficacy of therapeutic anti-Tau antibodies in a functional assay with human Alzheimer Tau. Acta Neuropathol, 2018. 136 (5 ): p. 729–745.30238240
100. Therapeutics Alzforum , E2814. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/e2814, Accessed 2021.
101. Therapeutics Alzforum , Bepranemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/bepranemab, Accessed 2021.
102. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04231513. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2020.
103. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04971733. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2021.
104. d’Abramo C , , Tau passive immunotherapy in mutant P301L mice: antibody affinity versus specificity. PLoS One, 2013. 8 (4 ): p. e62402.
105. Luo W , , Microglial internalization and degradation of pathological tau is enhanced by an anti-tau monoclonal antibody. Sci Rep, 2015. 5 : p. 11161.26057852
106. Vitale F , , Anti-tau conformational scFv MC1 antibody efficiently reduces pathological tau species in adult JNPL3 mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2018. 6 (1 ): p. 82.30134961
107. Therapeutics Alzforum , zagotenemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/zagotenemab, Accessed 2021.
108. Kondo A , , Antibody against early driver of neurodegeneration cis P-tau blocks brain injury and tauopathy. Nature, 2015. 523 (7561 ): p. 431–6.26176913
109. US National Library of Medicine, NCT02754830. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2016.
110. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03019536. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2017.
111. Gibbons GS , , Conformation-selective tau monoclonal antibodies inhibit tau pathology in primary neurons and a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Neurodegener, 2020. 15 (1 ): p. 64.33148293
112. Walls KC , , p-Tau immunotherapy reduces soluble and insoluble tau in aged 3xTg-AD mice. Neurosci Lett, 2014. 575 : p. 96–100.24887583
113. Sankaranarayanan S , , Passive immunization with phospho-tau antibodies reduces tau pathology and functional deficits in two distinct mouse tauopathy models. PLoS One, 2015. 10 (5 ): p. e0125614.
114. Therapeutics Alzforum , PNT001. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/pnt001, Accessed 2021.
115. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04096287. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2019.
116. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04677829. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2020.
117. Qiu C , , Cis P-tau underlies vascular contribution to cognitive impairment and dementia and can be effectively targeted by immunotherapy in mice. Sci Transl Med, 2021. 13 (596 ).
118. Congdon EE , , Antibody uptake into neurons occurs primarily via clathrin-dependent Fcgamma receptor endocytosis and is a prerequisite for acute tau protein clearance. J Biol Chem, 2013. 288 (49 ): p. 35452–65.24163366
119. Gu J , Congdon EE , and Sigurdsson EM , Two novel Tau antibodies targeting the 396/404 region are primarily taken up by neurons and reduce Tau protein pathology. J Biol Chem, 2013. 288 (46 ): p. 33081–95.24089520
120. Chai X , , Passive immunization with anti-Tau antibodies in two transgenic models: reduction of Tau pathology and delay of disease progression. J Biol Chem, 2011. 286 (39 ): p. 34457–67.21841002
121. Ittner A , , Tau-targeting passive immunization modulates aspects of pathology in tau transgenic mice. J Neurochem, 2015. 132 (1 ): p. 135–45.25041093
122. Krishnamurthy PK , Deng Y , and Sigurdsson EM , Mechanistic Studies of Antibody-Mediated Clearance of Tau Aggregates Using an ex vivo Brain Slice Model. Front Psychiatry, 2011. 2 : p. 59.22025915
123. Liu W , , Vectored Intracerebral Immunization with the Anti-Tau Monoclonal Antibody PHF1 Markedly Reduces Tau Pathology in Mutant Tau Transgenic Mice. J Neurosci, 2016. 36 (49 ): p. 12425–12435.27927959
124. Andersson CR , , Antibody-mediated clearance of tau in primary mouse microglial cultures requires Fcgamma-receptor binding and functional lysosomes. Sci Rep, 2019. 9 (1 ): p. 4658.30874605
125. Therapeutics Alzforum , Lu AF87908. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/lu-af87908, Accessed 2021.
126. US National Library of Medicine, NCT04149860. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2019.
127. Wu Q , , Increased neuronal activity in motor cortex reveals prominent calcium dyshomeostasis in tauopathy mice. Neurobiol Dis, 2021. 147 : p. 105165.
128. Umeda T , E. H., Kunori Y , Matsumoto Y , Taniguchi T , Mori H , Tomiyama T , Passive immunothrapy of tauopathy targeting pSer413-tau: a pilot study in mice. Ann Clin Transl Neurol, 2015. 2 (3 ): p. 241–255.25815351
129. Collin L , , Neuronal uptake of tau/pS422 antibody and reduced progression of tau pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain, 2014. 137 (Pt 10 ): p. 2834–46.25085375
130. Therapeutics Alzforum , RG7345. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/rg7345, Accessed 2021.
131. US National Library of Medicine, NCT02281786. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2014.
132. Castillo-Carranza DL , , Specific targeting of tau oligomers in Htau mice prevents cognitive impairment and tau toxicity following injection with brain-derived tau oligomeric seeds. J Alzheimers Dis, 2014. 40 Suppl 1 : p. S97–S111.24603946
133. Schroeder S , , Oligomeric tau-targeted immunotherapy in Tg4510 mice. Alzheimers Res Ther, 2017. 9 (1 ): p. 46.28655349
134. Chandupatla RR , , Novel antibody against low-n oligomers of tau protein promotes clearance of tau in cells via lysosomes. Alzheimers Dement (N Y), 2020. 6 (1 ): p. e12097.
135. US National Library of Medicine, NCT03518073. ClinicalTrials.gov, 2018.
136. Abskharon R , , Crystal structure of a conformational antibody that binds tau oligomers and inhibits pathological seeding by extracts from donors with Alzheimer’s disease. J Biol Chem, 2020. 295 (31 ): p. 10662–10676.32493775
137. Li S , , A Single-Chain Variable Fragment Antibody Inhibits Aggregation of Phosphorylated Tau and Ameliorates Tau Toxicity in vitro and in vivo. J Alzheimers Dis, 2021. 79 (4 ): p. 1613–1629.33459708
138. Krishnaswamy S , , Neuronally expressed anti-tau scFv prevents tauopathy-induced phenotypes in Drosophila models. Neurobiol Dis, 2020. 137 : p. 104770.
139. Zhou C , , A human single-chain Fv intrabody blocks aberrant cellular effects of overexpressed alpha-synuclein. Mol Ther, 2004. 10 (6 ): p. 1023–31.15564134
140. Khoshnan A , Ko J , and Patterson PH , Effects of intracellular expression of anti-huntingtin antibodies of various specificities on mutant huntingtin aggregation and toxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2002. 99 (2 ): p. 1002–7.11792860
141. Southwell AL , , Intrabodies binding the proline-rich domains of mutant huntingtin increase its turnover and reduce neurotoxicity. J Neurosci, 2008. 28 (36 ): p. 9013–20.18768695
142. Colby DW , , Potent inhibition of huntingtin aggregation and cytotoxicity by a disulfide bond-free single-domain intracellular antibody. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2004. 101 (51 ): p. 17616–21.15598740
143. Wu Q , , Dynamic assessment of tau immunotherapies in the brains of live animals by two-photon imaging. EBioMedicine, 2018. 35 : p. 270–278.30146345
144. Wu Q , B. Y., Li W , Liu W , Lin Y , Congdon EE , Gan W , Sigurdsson EM , Neuronal calcium dyshomeostasis in tauopathy mice. Neurbiol Dis, 2021. 147 (105165).
145. Shamir DB , , Dynamics of Internalization and Intracellular Interaction of Tau Antibodies and Human Pathological Tau Protein in a Human Neuron-Like Model. Front Neurol, 2020. 11 : p. 602292.
146. Braak H and Braak E , Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol, 1991. 82 (4 ): p. 239–59.1759558
147. Braak H and Braak E , Frequency of stages of Alzheimer-related lesions in different age categories. Neurobiol Aging, 1997. 18 (4 ): p. 351–7.9330961
148. Nelson PT , , Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 2012. 71 (5 ): p. 362–81.22487856
149. Jensen M , Basun H , and Lannfelt L , Increased cerebrospinal fluid tau in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci Lett, 1995. 186 (2–3 ): p. 189–91.7777193
150. Sjogren M , , Both total and phosphorylated tau are increased in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 2001. 70 (5 ): p. 624–30.11309456
151. Barthelemy NR , , Differential Mass Spectrometry Profiles of Tau Protein in the Cerebrospinal Fluid of Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease, Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, and Dementia with Lewy Bodies. J Alzheimers Dis, 2016. 51 (4 ): p. 1033–43.26923020
152. Olsson B , , CSF and blood biomarkers for the diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol, 2016. 15 (7 ): p. 673–684.27068280
153. Wagshal D , , Divergent CSF tau alterations in two common tauopathies: Alzheimer’s disease and progressive supranuclear palsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry, 2015. 86 (3 ): p. 244–50.24899730
154. Grossman M , , Cerebrospinal fluid profile in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol, 2005. 57 (5 ): p. 721–9.15852395
155. Chai X , Dage JL , and Citron M , Constitutive secretion of tau protein by an unconventional mechanism. Neurobiol Dis, 2012. 48 (3 ): p. 356–66.22668776
156. Lee S , , Accumulation of vesicle-associated human tau in distal dendrites drives degeneration and tau secretion in an in situ cellular tauopathy model. Int J Alzheimers Dis, 2012. 2012 : p. 172837.
157. Mohamed NV , , Starvation and inhibition of lysosomal function increased tau secretion by primary cortical neurons. Sci Rep, 2014. 4 : p. 5715.25030297
158. Pooler AM , , Physiological release of endogenous tau is stimulated by neuronal activity. EMBO Rep, 2013. 14 (4 ): p. 389–94.23412472
159. Saman S , , Exosome-associated tau is secreted in tauopathy models and is selectively phosphorylated in cerebrospinal fluid in early Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem, 2012. 287 (6 ): p. 3842–9.22057275
160. Simon D , , Tau overexpression results in its secretion via membrane vesicles. Neurodegener Dis, 2012. 10 (1–4 ): p. 73–5.22269430
161. Brunello CA , , Mechanisms of secretion and spreading of pathological tau protein. Cell Mol Life Sci, 2020. 77 (9 ): p. 1721–1744.31667556
162. Goedert M and Spillantini MG , Propagation of Tau aggregates. Mol Brain, 2017. 10 (1 ): p. 18.28558799
163. Brettschneider J , , Spreading of pathology in neurodegenerative diseases: a focus on human studies. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2015. 16 (2 ): p. 109–20.25588378
164. Goedert M , Clavaguera F , and Tolnay M , The propagation of prion-like protein inclusions in neurodegenerative diseases. Trends Neurosci, 2010. 33 (7 ): p. 317–25.20493564
165. Pernegre C , Duquette A , and Leclerc N , Tau Secretion: Good and Bad for Neurons. Front Neurosci, 2019. 13 : p. 649.31293374
166. Wang Y , , The release and trans-synaptic transmission of Tau via exosomes. Mol Neurodegener, 2017. 12 (1 ): p. 5.28086931
167. Guix FX , , Detection of Aggregation-Competent Tau in Neuron-Derived Extracellular Vesicles. Int J Mol Sci, 2018. 19 (3 ).
168. Baker S , Polanco JC , and Gotz J , Extracellular Vesicles Containing P301L Mutant Tau Accelerate Pathological Tau Phosphorylation and Oligomer Formation but Do Not Seed Mature Neurofibrillary Tangles in ALZ17 Mice. J Alzheimers Dis, 2016. 54 (3 ): p. 1207–1217.27567840
169. Polanco JC , , Extracellular Vesicles Isolated from the Brains of rTg4510 Mice Seed Tau Protein Aggregation in a Threshold-dependent Manner. J Biol Chem, 2016. 291 (24 ): p. 12445–12466.27030011
170. Wu JW , , Neuronal activity enhances tau propagation and tau pathology in vivo. Nat Neurosci, 2016. 19 (8 ): p. 1085–92.27322420
171. Yamada K , , Neuronal activity regulates extracellular tau in vivo. J Exp Med, 2014. 211 (3 ): p. 387–93.24534188
172. Liu L , , Trans-synaptic spread of tau pathology in vivo. PloS one, 2012. 7 (2 ): p. e31302.
173. de Calignon A , , Propagation of tau pathology in a model of early Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron, 2012. 73 (4 ): p. 685–97.22365544
174. Yetman MJ , , Transgene expression in the Nop-tTA driver line is not inherently restricted to the entorhinal cortex. Brain Struct Funct, 2016. 221 (4 ): p. 2231–49.25869275
175. Rauch JN , , Tau Internalization is Regulated by 6-O Sulfation on Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans (HSPGs). Sci Rep, 2018. 8 (1 ): p. 6382.29686391
176. Holmes BB , , Heparan sulfate proteoglycans mediate internalization and propagation of specific proteopathic seeds. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2013. 110 (33 ): p. E3138–47.23898162
177. Zhao J , , 3-O-Sulfation of Heparan Sulfate Enhances Tau Interaction and Cellular Uptake. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl, 2020. 59 (5 ): p. 1818–1827.31692167
178. Sanders DW , , Distinct tau prion strains propagate in cells and mice and define different tauopathies. Neuron, 2014. 82 (6 ): p. 1271–88.24857020
179. Bright J , , Human secreted tau increases amyloid-beta production. Neurobiol Aging, 2015. 36 (2 ): p. 693–709.25442111
180. Castillo-Carranza DL , , Passive immunization with Tau oligomer monoclonal antibody reverses tauopathy phenotypes without affecting hyperphosphorylated neurofibrillary tangles. J Neurosci, 2014. 34 (12 ): p. 4260–72.24647946
181. Nicholls SB , , Characterization of TauC3 antibody and demonstration of its potential to block tau propagation. PLoS One, 2017. 12 (5 ): p. e0177914.
182. Rosenqvist N , , Highly specific and selective anti-pS396-tau antibody C10.2 targets seeding-competent tau. Alzheimers Dement (N Y), 2018. 4 : p. 521–534.30386817
183. Evans LD , , Extracellular Monomeric and Aggregated Tau Efficiently Enter Human Neurons through Overlapping but Distinct Pathways. Cell Rep, 2018. 22 (13 ): p. 3612–3624.29590627
184. d’Abramo C , , Detecting tau in serum of transgenic animal models after tau immunotherapy treatment. Neurobiol Aging, 2016. 37 : p. 58–65.26508157
185. Yanamandra K , Jiang H , Mahan TE , Maloney SE , Wozniak DF , Diamond M I , Holtzman DM , Anti-tau antibody reduces insoluble tau and decreases brain atrophy. Ann Clin Transl Neurol, 2015. 2 (3 ): p. 278–288.25815354
186. Tran HT , , Alpha-synuclein immunotherapy blocks uptake and templated propagation of misfolded alpha-synuclein and neurodegeneration. Cell Rep, 2014. 7 (6 ): p. 2054–65.24931606
187. Schofield DJ , , Preclinical development of a high affinity alpha-synuclein antibody, MEDI1341, that can enter the brain, sequester extracellular alpha-synuclein and attenuate alpha-synuclein spreading in vivo. Neurobiol Dis, 2019. 132 : p. 104582.
188. Bartl S , , Inhibiting cellular uptake of mutant huntingtin using a monoclonal antibody: Implications for the treatment of Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol Dis, 2020. 141 : p. 104943.
189. Lehmann M , , Aggregate-selective antibody attenuates seeded aggregation but not spontaneously evolving disease in SOD1 ALS model mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2020. 8 (1 ): p. 161.32928301
190. Majerova P , , Microglia display modest phagocytic capacity for extracellular tau oligomers. J Neuroinflammation, 2014. 11 (1 ): p. 161.25217135
191. Bolos M , , Direct Evidence of Internalization of Tau by Microglia In Vitro and In Vivo. J Alzheimers Dis, 2016. 50 (1 ): p. 77–87.26638867
192. Kontsekova E , , Identification of structural determinants on tau protein essential for its pathological function: novel therapeutic target for tau immunotherapy in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Res Ther, 2014. 6 (4 ): p. 45.25478018
193. Zilkova M , , Humanized tau antibodies promote tau uptake by human microglia without any increase of inflammation. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2020. 8 (1 ): p. 74.32471486
194. Bae EJ , , Antibody-aided clearance of extracellular alpha-synuclein prevents cell-to-cell aggregate transmission. J Neurosci, 2012. 32 (39 ): p. 13454–69.23015436
195. Ayalon G , , Antibody semorinemab reduces tau pathology in a transgenic mouse model and engages tau in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med, 2021. 13 (593 ).
196. Bajracharya R , , Tau antibody isotype induces differential effects following passive immunisation of tau transgenic mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2021. 9 (1 ): p. 42.33712083
197. AC Immune Press Release, AC Immune Announces First Positive Cognitive Results for a Tau-Targeting Monoclonal Antibody in Alzheimer’s Disease. https://ir.acimmune.com/news-releases/news-release-details/ac-immune-announces-first-positive-cognitive-results-tau, 2021.
198. Sigurdsson EM , Alzheimer’s therapy development: A few points to consider. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci, 2019. 168 : p. 205–217.31699315
199. Han P , , A Quantitative Analysis of Brain Soluble Tau and the Tau Secretion Factor. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 2017. 76 (1 ): p. 44–51.28069930
200. Hall S , , Accuracy of a panel of 5 cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers in the differential diagnosis of patients with dementia and/or parkinsonian disorders. Arch Neurol, 2012. 69 (11 ): p. 1445–52.22925882
201. Hu WT , Trojanowski JQ , and Shaw LM , Biomarkers in frontotemporal lobar degenerations--progress and challenges. Prog Neurobiol, 2011. 95 (4 ): p. 636–48.21554923
202. Bian H , , CSF biomarkers in frontotemporal lobar degeneration with known pathology. Neurology, 2008. 70 (19 Pt 2): p. 1827–35.18458217
203. Abbott NJ , , The role of brain barriers in fluid movement in the CNS: is there a ‘glymphatic’ system? Acta Neuropathol, 2018. 135 (3 ): p. 387–407.29428972
204. Sato C , , Tau Kinetics in Neurons and the Human Central Nervous System. Neuron, 2018. 97 (6 ): p. 1284–1298 e7.29566794
205. Barthelemy NR , , Tau Protein Quantification in Human Cerebrospinal Fluid by Targeted Mass Spectrometry at High Sequence Coverage Provides Insights into Its Primary Structure Heterogeneity. J Proteome Res, 2016. 15 (2 ): p. 667–76.26742856
206. Barthelemy NR , , Tau Phosphorylation Rates Measured by Mass Spectrometry Differ in the Intracellular Brain vs. Extracellular Cerebrospinal Fluid Compartments and Are Differentially Affected by Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Aging Neurosci, 2019. 11 : p. 121.31178717
207. Barghorn S , Davies P , and Mandelkow E , Tau paired helical filaments from Alzheimer’s disease brain and assembled in vitro are based on beta-structure in the core domain. Biochemistry, 2004. 43 (6 ): p. 1694–703.14769047
208. Goux WJ , , The formation of straight and twisted filaments from short tau peptides. J Biol Chem, 2004. 279 (26 ): p. 26868–75.15100221
209. Frost B , Jacks RL , and Diamond MI , Propagation of tau misfolding from the outside to the inside of a cell. J Biol Chem, 2009. 284 (19 ): p. 12845–52.19282288
210. Iba M , , Synthetic tau fibrils mediate transmission of neurofibrillary tangles in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s-like tauopathy. J Neurosci, 2013. 33 (3 ): p. 1024–37.23325240
211. Kanmert D , , C-Terminally Truncated Forms of Tau, But Not Full-Length Tau or Its C-Terminal Fragments, Are Released from Neurons Independently of Cell Death. J Neurosci, 2015. 35 (30 ): p. 10851–65.26224867
212. Tao MH , Smith RI , and Morrison SL , Structural features of human immunoglobulin G that determine isotype-specific differences in complement activation. J Exp Med, 1993. 178 (2 ): p. 661–7.8340761
213. Bindon CI , , Human monoclonal IgG isotypes differ in complement activating function at the level of C4 as well as C1q. J Exp Med, 1988. 168 (1 ): p. 127–42.3260935
214. Bruhns P , , Specificity and affinity of human Fcgamma receptors and their polymorphic variants for human IgG subclasses. Blood, 2009. 113 (16 ): p. 3716–25.19018092
215. Handlogten MW , , Prevention of Fab-arm exchange and antibody reduction via stabilization of the IgG4 hinge region. MAbs, 2020. 12 (1 ): p. 1779974.
216. Pepinsky RB , , Improving the solubility of anti-LINGO-1 monoclonal antibody Li33 by isotype switching and targeted mutagenesis. Protein Sci, 2010. 19 (5 ): p. 954–66.20198683
217. Heads JT , , Electrostatic interactions modulate the differential aggregation propensities of IgG1 and IgG4P antibodies and inform charged residue substitutions for improved developability. Protein Eng Des Sel, 2019. 32 (6 ): p. 277–288.31868219
218. Morell A , Terry WD , and Waldmann TA , Metabolic properties of IgG subclasses in man. J Clin Invest, 1970. 49 (4 ): p. 673–80.5443170
219. Schuurman J , , Normal human immunoglobulin G4 is bispecific: it has two different antigen-combining sites. Immunology, 1999. 97 (4 ): p. 693–8.10457225
220. van der Neut Kolfschoten, M., , Anti-inflammatory activity of human IgG4 antibodies by dynamic Fab arm exchange. Science, 2007. 317 (5844 ): p. 1554–7.17872445
221. Labrijn AF , , Species-specific determinants in the IgG CH3 domain enable Fab-arm exchange by affecting the noncovalent CH3-CH3 interaction strength. J Immunol, 2011. 187 (6 ): p. 3238–46.21841137
222. Labrijn AF , , Therapeutic IgG4 antibodies engage in Fab-arm exchange with endogenous human IgG4 in vivo. Nat Biotechnol, 2009. 27 (8 ): p. 767–71.19620983
223. Young E , , Estimation of polyclonal IgG4 hybrids in normal human serum. Immunology, 2014. 142 (3 ): p. 406–13.24512211
224. Silva JP , , The S228P mutation prevents in vivo and in vitro IgG4 Fab-arm exchange as demonstrated using a combination of novel quantitative immunoassays and physiological matrix preparation. J Biol Chem, 2015. 290 (9 ): p. 5462–9.25568323
225. Lewis KB , , Comparison of the ability of wild type and stabilized human IgG(4) to undergo Fab arm exchange with endogenous IgG(4)in vitro and in vivo. Mol Immunol, 2009. 46 (16 ): p. 3488–94.19683345
226. Herbener P , , Functional relevance of in vivo half antibody exchange of an IgG4 therapeutic antibody-drug conjugate. PLoS One, 2018. 13 (4 ): p. e0195823.
227. Hintersteiner B , , Microheterogeneity of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies is governed by changes in the surface charge of the protein. Biotechnol J, 2016. 11 (12 ): p. 1617–1627.27753240
228. Hintersteiner B , , Charge heterogeneity: Basic antibody charge variants with increased binding to Fc receptors. MAbs, 2016. 8 (8 ): p. 1548–1560.27559765
229. Schoch A , , Charge-mediated influence of the antibody variable domain on FcRn-dependent pharmacokinetics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2015. 112 (19 ): p. 5997–6002.25918417
230. Hong G , , Enhanced cellular uptake and transport of polyclonal immunoglobulin G and fab after their cationization. J Drug Target, 2000. 8 (2 ): p. 67–77.10852339
231. Igawa T , , Reduced elimination of IgG antibodies by engineering the variable region. Protein Eng Des Sel, 2010. 23 (5 ): p. 385–92.20159773
232. Khawli LA , , Improved tumor localization and radioimaging with chemically modified monoclonal antibodies. Cancer Biother Radiopharm, 1996. 11 (3 ): p. 203–15.10851539
233. Triguero D , , Blood-brain barrier transport of cationized immunoglobulin G: enhanced delivery compared to native protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 1989. 86 (12 ): p. 4761–5.2734318
234. Triguero D , Buciak JL , and Pardridge WM , Cationization of immunoglobulin G results in enhanced organ uptake of the protein after intravenous administration in rats and primate. J Pharmacol Exp Ther, 1991. 258 (1 ): p. 186–92.2072295
235. Zheng Y , , Minipig as a potential translatable model for monoclonal antibody pharmacokinetics after intravenous and subcutaneous administration. MAbs, 2012. 4 (2 ): p. 243–55.22453096
236. Igawa T , , Engineering the variable region of therapeutic IgG antibodies. MAbs, 2011. 3 (3 ): p. 243–52.21406966
237. Asai H , , Depletion of microglia and inhibition of exosome synthesis halt tau propagation. Nat Neurosci, 2015. 18 (11 ): p. 1584–93.26436904
238. Shi Y , , Microglia drive APOE-dependent neurodegeneration in a tauopathy mouse model. J Exp Med, 2019. 216 (11 ): p. 2546–2561.31601677
239. Mancuso R , , CSF1R inhibitor JNJ-40346527 attenuates microglial proliferation and neurodegeneration in P301S mice. Brain, 2019. 142 (10 ): p. 3243–3264.31504240
240. Pascoal TA , , Microglial activation and tau propagate jointly across Braak stages. Nat Med, 2021. 27 (9 ): p. 1592–1599.34446931
241. Gratuze M , , Activated microglia mitigate Abeta-associated tau seeding and spreading. J Exp Med, 2021. 218 (8 ).
242. Bolos M , Perea JR , and Avila J , Alzheimer’s disease as an inflammatory disease. Biomol Concepts, 2017. 8 (1 ): p. 37–43.28231054
243. McEwan WA , , Cytosolic Fc receptor TRIM21 inhibits seeded tau aggregation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2017. 114 (3 ): p. 574–579.28049840
244. Krishnaswamy S , , Antibody-derived in vivo imaging of tau pathology. J Neurosci, 2014. 34 (50 ): p. 16835–50.25505335
245. Shamir DB , , Internalization of tau antibody and pathological tau protein detected with a flow cytometry multiplexing approach. Alzheimer’s and Dement, 2016. 12 (10 ): p. 1098–1107.
246. Gustafsson G , , Cellular Uptake of alpha-Synuclein Oligomer-Selective Antibodies is Enhanced by the Extracellular Presence of alpha-Synuclein and Mediated via Fcgamma Receptors. Cell Mol Neurobiol, 2017. 37 : p. 121–131.26961542
247. Masliah E , , Effects of alpha-synuclein immunization in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Neuron, 2005. 46 (6 ): p. 857–68.15953415
248. Masliah E , , Passive immunization reduces behavioral and neuropathological deficits in an alpha-synuclein transgenic model of Lewy body disease. PloS one, 2011. 6 (4 ): p. e19338.
249. Nguyen L , , Antibody Therapy Targeting RAN Proteins Rescues C9 ALS/FTD Phenotypes in C9orf72 Mouse Model. Neuron, 2020. 105 (4 ): p. 645–662 e11.31831332
250. Benkler C , , Aggregated SOD1 causes selective death of cultured human motor neurons. Sci Rep, 2018. 8 (1 ): p. 16393.30401824
251. Pozzi S , , Monoclonal full-length antibody against TAR DNA binding protein 43 reduces related proteinopathy in neurons. JCI Insight, 2020. 5 (21 ).
252. Karpiak SE and Mahadik SP , Selective uptake by Purkinje neurons of antibodies to S-100 protein. Exp Neurol, 1987. 98 (2 ): p. 453–7.3666088
253. Fabian RH and Ritchie TC , Intraneuronal IgG in the central nervous system. J Neurol Sci, 1986. 73 (3 ): p. 257–67.3522806
254. Greenlee JE , , Uptake of systemically administered human anticerebellar antibody by rat Purkinje cells following blood-brain barrier disruption. Acta Neuropathol, 1995. 89 (4 ): p. 341–5.7610765
255. Graus F , , Effect of intraventricular injection of an anti-Purkinje cell anti-body (anti-Yo) in a guinea pig model. J Neurol Sci, 1991. 106 (1 ): p. 82–7.1779243
256. Hill KE , , Cerebellar Purkinje cells incorporate immunoglobulins and immunotoxins in vitro: implications for human neurological disease and immunotherapeutics. J Neuroinflammation, 2009. 6 : p. 31.19874605
257. Greenlee JE , , Neuronal uptake of anti-Hu antibody, but not anti-Ri antibody, leads to cell death in brain slice cultures. J Neuroinflammation, 2014. 11 : p. 160.25228406
258. Greenlee JE , , Purkinje cell death after uptake of anti-Yo antibodies in cerebellar slice cultures. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol, 2010. 69 (10 ): p. 997–1007.20838245
259. Rocchi A , , Autoantibodies to synapsin I sequestrate synapsin I and alter synaptic function. Cell Death Dis, 2019. 10 (11 ): p. 864.31727880
260. Goldwaser EL , , Evidence that Brain-Reactive Autoantibodies Contribute to Chronic Neuronal Internalization of Exogenous Amyloid-beta1–42 and Key Cell Surface Proteins During Alzheimer’s Disease Pathogenesis. J Alzheimers Dis, 2020. 74 (1 ): p. 345–361.32039847
261. Boutajangout A , Quartermain D , and Sigurdsson EM , Immunotherapy targeting pathological tau prevents cognitive decline in a new tangle mouse model. J Neurosci, 2010. 30 (49 ): p. 16559–66.21147995
262. Ke YD , , Lessons from tau-deficient mice. Int J Alzheimers Dis, 2012. 2012 : p. 873270.
263. Rajamohamedsait H , , Prophylactic Active Tau Immunization Leads to Sustained Reduction in Both Tau and Amyloid-beta Pathologies in 3xTg Mice. Sci Rep, 2017. 7 (1 ): p. 17034.29213096
264. Nakamura K , , CD3 and immunoglobulin G Fc receptor regulate cerebellar functions. Mol Cell Biol, 2007. 27 (14 ): p. 5128–34.17502348
265. van der Kleij H , , Evidence for neuronal expression of functional Fc (epsilon and gamma) receptors. J Allergy Clin Immunol, 2010. 125 (3 ): p. 757–60.20132972
266. Stamou M , , Fc gamma receptors are expressed in the developing rat brain and activate downstream signaling molecules upon cross-linking with immune complex. J Neuroinflammation, 2018. 15 (1 ): p. 7.29306331
267. Suemitsu S , , Fcgamma receptors contribute to pyramidal cell death in the mouse hippocampus following local kainic acid injection. Neuroscience, 2010. 166 (3 ): p. 819–31.20074624
268. Mohamed HA , , Immunoglobulin Fc gamma receptor promotes immunoglobulin uptake, immunoglobulin-mediated calcium increase, and neurotransmitter release in motor neurons. J Neurosci Res, 2002. 69 (1 ): p. 110–6.12111822
269. Andoh T and Kuraishi Y , Direct action of immunoglobulin G on primary sensory neurons through Fc gamma receptor I. FASEB Journal, 2004. 18 (1 ): p. 182–4.14630707
270. Fuller JP , Stavenhagen JB , and Teeling JL , New roles for Fc receptors in neurodegeneration-the impact on Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Neurosci, 2014. 8 : p. 235.25191216
271. Qu L , , Neuronal Fc-gamma receptor I mediated excitatory effects of IgG immune complex on rat dorsal root ganglion neurons. Brain Behav Immun, 2011. 25 (7 ): p. 1399–407.21521651
272. Nasstrom T , , Antibodies against alpha-synuclein reduce oligomerization in living cells. PLoS One, 2011. 6 (10 ): p. e27230.
273. Kobayashi H , , The pharmacokinetic characteristics of glycolated humanized anti-Tac Fabs are determined by their isoelectric points. Cancer Res, 1999. 59 (2 ): p. 422–30.9927057
274. Li B , , Framework selection can influence pharmacokinetics of a humanized therapeutic antibody through differences in molecule charge. MAbs, 2014. 6 (5 ): p. 1255–64.25517310
275. Datta-Mannan A , , Balancing charge in the complementarity-determining regions of humanized mAbs without affecting pI reduces non-specific binding and improves the pharmacokinetics. MAbs, 2015. 7 (3 ): p. 483–93.25695748
276. Goodwin MS , , Anti-tau scFvs Targeted to the Cytoplasm or Secretory Pathway Variably Modify Pathology and Neurodegenerative Phenotypes. Mol Ther, 2021. 29 (2 ): p. 859–872.33128896
277. Menzies FM , Fleming A , and Rubinsztein DC , Compromised autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2015. 16 (6 ): p. 345–57.25991442
278. Nixon RA , The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nat Med, 2013. 19 (8 ): p. 983–97.23921753
279. Perez M , , Tau--an inhibitor of deacetylase HDAC6 function. J Neurochem, 2009. 109 (6 ): p. 1756–66.19457097
280. Wang Y , , Tau fragmentation, aggregation and clearance: the dual role of lysosomal processing. Hum Mol Genet, 2009. 18 (21 ): p. 4153–70.19654187
281. Caballero B , , Acetylated tau inhibits chaperone-mediated autophagy and promotes tau pathology propagation in mice. Nat Commun, 2021. 12 (1 ): p. 2238.33854069
282. Keck S , , Proteasome inhibition by paired helical filament-tau in brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem, 2003. 85 (1 ): p. 115–22.12641733
283. Myeku N , , Tau-driven 26S proteasome impairment and cognitive dysfunction can be prevented early in disease by activating cAMP-PKA signaling. Nat Med, 2016. 22 (1 ): p. 46–53.26692334
284. Feng Q , , MAPT/Tau accumulation represses autophagy flux by disrupting IST1-regulated ESCRT-III complex formation: a vicious cycle in Alzheimer neurodegeneration. Autophagy, 2019: p. 1–18.
285. Caballero B , , Interplay of pathogenic forms of human tau with different autophagic pathways. Aging Cell, 2018. 17 (1 ).
286. Yu A , , Tau protein aggregates inhibit the protein-folding and vesicular trafficking arms of the cellular proteostasis network. J Biol Chem, 2019. 294 (19 ): p. 7917–7930.30936201
287. Polanco JC and Gotz J , Exosomal and vesicle-free tau seeds-propagation and convergence in endolysosomal permeabilization. FEBS J, 2021.
288. Calafate S , , Loss of Bin1 Promotes the Propagation of Tau Pathology. Cell Rep, 2016. 17 (4 ): p. 931–940.27760323
289. Jones EM , , Interaction of tau protein with model lipid membranes induces tau structural compaction and membrane disruption. Biochemistry, 2012. 51 (12 ): p. 2539–50.22401494
290. Gallardo G , , Targeting tauopathy with engineered tau-degrading intrabodies. Mol Neurodegener, 2019. 14 (1 ): p. 38.31640765
291. Grice GL and Nathan JA , The recognition of ubiquitinated proteins by the proteasome. Cell Mol Life Sci, 2016. 73 (18 ): p. 3497–506.27137187
292. Ferreira JV , , K63 linked ubiquitin chain formation is a signal for HIF1A degradation by Chaperone-Mediated Autophagy. Sci Rep, 2015. 5 : p. 10210.25958982
293. Tan JM , , Lysine 63-linked ubiquitination promotes the formation and autophagic clearance of protein inclusions associated with neurodegenerative diseases. Hum Mol Genet, 2008. 17 (3 ): p. 431–9.17981811
294. Wang W , , A novel small-molecule PROTAC selectively promotes tau clearance to improve cognitive functions in Alzheimer-like models. Theranostics, 2021. 11 (11 ): p. 5279–5295.33859747
295. Silva MC , , Targeted degradation of aberrant tau in frontotemporal dementia patient-derived neuronal cell models. Elife, 2019. 8 .
296. Chu TT , , Specific Knockdown of Endogenous Tau Protein by Peptide-Directed Ubiquitin-Proteasome Degradation. Cell Chem Biol, 2016. 23 (4 ): p. 453–61.27105281
297. Lu M , , Discovery of a Keap1-dependent peptide PROTAC to knockdown Tau by ubiquitination-proteasome degradation pathway. Eur J Med Chem, 2018. 146 : p. 251–259.29407955
298. Lim S , , bioPROTACs as versatile modulators of intracellular therapeutic targets including proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2020. 117 (11 ): p. 5791–5800.32123106
299. Ibrahim AFM , , Antibody RING-Mediated Destruction of Endogenous Proteins. Mol Cell, 2020. 79 (1 ): p. 155–166 e9.32454028
300. Roth S , , Targeting Endogenous K-RAS for Degradation through the Affinity-Directed Protein Missile System. Cell Chem Biol, 2020. 27 (9 ): p. 1151–1163 e6.32668202
301. Butler DC and Messer A , Bifunctional anti-huntingtin proteasome-directed intrabodies mediate efficient degradation of mutant huntingtin exon 1 protein fragments. PLoS One, 2011. 6 (12 ): p. e29199.
302. Butler DC , , Bifunctional Anti-Non-Amyloid Component alpha-Synuclein Nanobodies Are Protective In Situ. PLoS One, 2016. 11 (11 ): p. e0165964.
303. Chatterjee D , , Proteasome-targeted nanobodies alleviate pathology and functional decline in an alpha-synuclein-based Parkinson’s disease model. NPJ Parkinsons Dis, 2018. 4 : p. 25.30155513
304. Sun H , , A Tauopathy-Homing and Autophagy-Activating Nanoassembly for Specific Clearance of Pathogenic Tau in Alzheimer’s Disease. ACS Nano, 2021. 15 (3 ): p. 5263–5275.33683854
305. Song W , , Ceria nanoparticles stabilized by organic surface coatings activate the lysosome-autophagy system and enhance autophagic clearance. ACS Nano, 2014. 8 (10 ): p. 10328–42.25315655
306. Zheng J , , A novel dephosphorylation targeting chimera selectively promoting tau removal in tauopathies. Signal Transduct Target Ther, 2021. 6 (1 ): p. 269.34262014
307. Britti E , , Tau inhibits mitochondrial calcium efflux and makes neurons vulnerable to calcium-induced cell death. Cell Calcium, 2020. 86 : p. 102150.
308. Esteras N , , Insoluble tau aggregates induce neuronal death through modification of membrane ion conductance, activation of voltage-gated calcium channels and NADPH oxidase. FEBS J, 2021. 288 (1 ): p. 127–141.32338825
309. Imamura K , , Calcium dysregulation contributes to neurodegeneration in FTLD patient iPSC-derived neurons. Sci Rep, 2016. 6 : p. 34904.27721502
310. Furukawa K , , Alteration in calcium channel properties is responsible for the neurotoxic action of a familial frontotemporal dementia tau mutation. J Neurochem, 2003. 87 (2 ): p. 427–36.14511120
311. Mahoney R , , Pathogenic Tau Causes a Toxic Depletion of Nuclear Calcium. Cell Rep, 2020. 32 (2 ): p. 107900.
312. Cieri D , , Tau localises within mitochondrial sub-compartments and its caspase cleavage affects ER-mitochondria interactions and cellular Ca(2+) handling. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis, 2018. 1864 (10 ): p. 3247–3256.30006151
313. Darios F , , Neurotoxic calcium transfer from endoplasmic reticulum to mitochondria is regulated by cyclin-dependent kinase 5-dependent phosphorylation of tau. J Neurosci, 2005. 25 (16 ): p. 4159–68.15843619
314. Berrocal M , , Inhibition of PMCA activity by tau as a function of aging and Alzheimer’s neuropathology. Biochim Biophys Acta, 2015. 1852 (7 ): p. 1465–76.25892185
315. Decker JM , , Pro-aggregant Tau impairs mossy fiber plasticity due to structural changes and Ca(++) dysregulation. Acta Neuropathol Commun, 2015. 3 : p. 23.25853683
316. Marinkovic P , , In vivo imaging reveals reduced activity of neuronal circuits in a mouse tauopathy model. Brain, 2019. 142 (4 ): p. 1051–1062.30847469
317. Overk CR , , Differential calcium alterations in animal models of neurodegenerative disease: Reversal by FK506. Neuroscience, 2015. 310 : p. 549–60.26341908
318. Busche MA , , Tau impairs neural circuits, dominating amyloid-beta effects, in Alzheimer models in vivo. Nat Neurosci, 2019. 22 (1 ): p. 57–64.30559471
319. Kuchibhotla KV , , Neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons are functionally integrated in cortical circuits in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2014. 111 (1 ): p. 510–4.24368848
320. Kopeikina KJ , , Tau causes synapse loss without disrupting calcium homeostasis in the rTg4510 model of tauopathy. PLoS One, 2013. 8 (11 ): p. e80834.
321. Braak H , Alafuzoff I , Arzberger T , Kretzschmar H , Del Tredici K , Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunohistochemistry. Acta Neuropathol, 2006. 112 (4 ): p. 389–404.16906426
322. Rauch JN , , LRP1 is a master regulator of tau uptake and spread. Nature, 2020 580 (7803 ): p. 381–385 32296178
