LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9513583
21522
Parkinsonism Relat Disord
Parkinsonism Relat Disord
Parkinsonism &amp; related disorders
1353-8020
1873-5126

36682219
9946437
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2023.105290
NIHMS1867195
Article
Longitudinal clinical decline and baseline predictors in progressive supranuclear palsy
Pavone Costanza MD 1234
Weigand Stephen W. MS 7
Ali Farwa MD 1
Clark Heather M. PhD 1
Botha Hugo MD 1
Machulda Mary M. PhD 9
Savica Rodolfo MD 1
Thu Nha Trang Pham, BS 8
Grijalva Rosalie M. BA 4
Schwarz Christopher G. PhD 4
Senjem Matthew L. MS 810
Agosta Federica MD 234
Filippi Massimo MD 23456
Jack Clifford R. Jr MD 8
Lowe Val J. MD 8
Josephs Keith A. MD, MST, MSc 1
Whitwell Jennifer L. PhD 8
1 Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
2 Neuroimaging Research Unit, Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy
3 Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy
4 Neurology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy
5 Neurorehabilitation Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy
6 Neurophysiology Service, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy
7 Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
8 Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
9 Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
10 Department of Information Technology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
Corresponding author: Jennifer L. Whitwell, PhD, Professor of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, 200 1st St SW, Rochester MN 55905, Tel: 507-284-5576, Fax: 507-284-9778, Whitwell.jennifer@mayo.edu
2 2 2023
2 2023
16 1 2023
01 2 2024
107 105290105290
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Introduction:

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is associated with several clinical variants defined based on ocular motor dysfunction, postural instability, akinesia, and cognitive dysfunction, although little is known about how these features progress over time. We aimed to assess the evolution of these core clinical features across variants and assess baseline clinical and neuroimaging predictors of progression.

Methods:

Ninety-three PSP patients were recruited by the Neurodegenerative Research Group, Mayo Clinic, and underwent two visits 1-year apart, with baseline MRI and [18F]flortaucipir PET. We compared baseline and annualized rates of clinical change on the PSP Rating Scale (total, ocular motor, gait/midline scores) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment, across PSP-Richardson’s, PSP-Cortical and PSP-Subcortical variants and assessed relationships between rates of change and baseline regional imaging.

Results:

Ocular motor scores differed across groups at baseline and follow-up, with lowest scores observed in PSP-subcortical, but no differences were observed in rate of change across groups. PSP Rating Scale total and gait/midline scores differed across groups at follow-up and in rates of change, with PSP-subcortical showing the least impairment and slowest progression. Greatest cognitive impairment was observed in PSP-Cortical. Sample size estimates for treatment trials differed across PSP variants. Greater baseline flortaucipir uptake, but not volume, of midbrain and motor cortex correlated with faster rates of clinical decline.

Conclusion:

The PSP Rating Scale and its subscores might be useful markers for the prognostic stratification of PSP variants. Flortaucipir imaging at baseline may help predict rate of decline.


pmcINTRODUCTION

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by the accumulation of the microtubule-binding protein tau[1]. In 2017, the Movement Disorder Society (MDS) introduced new criteria for the possible or probable diagnosis of PSP[2]. The criteria stratify patients into syndromic variants based on the chief clinical features of ocular motor dysfunction, postural instability, akinesia, and cognitive dysfunction[3, 4].

The most common variant, Richardson’s syndrome (PSP-Richardson)[3, 5] is characterized by early postural instability and falls, with vertical eye movement abnormalities. Other variants present with features such as corticobasal syndrome (PSP-corticobasal)[6], speech and language deficits (PSP-speech/language)[7], parkinsonism (PSP-parkinsonism)[5], behavioral deficits (PSP-frontal)[8], progressive gait freezing (PSP-gait freezing)[9], or postural instability (PSP-postural). A variant characterized by prominent corticospinal signs has also been described (PSP-corticospinal)[10]. PSP variants differ by radiological and clinical presentation[11], and variants can be classified into those that predominantly involve the cortex (PSP-frontal, PSP-corticobasal, PSP-speech/language) and those that predominantly involve subcortical structures (PSP-parkinsonism, PSP-gait freezing, PSP-postural). The PSP Rating scale[12] and the MDS sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale part III (MDS-UPDRS III)[13] are commonly used to assess disease severity and the core features of ocular motor impairment, parkinsonism and postural instability in PSP, and these scales have demonstrated good sensitivity in detecting decline over time in PSP patients[14, 15]. Cross-sectionally, performance on the PSP Rating Scale and degree of ocular motor impairment has been found to differ across PSP variants, with PSP-Richardson’s patients often performing the worst[11, 16]. Cognitive deficits measured using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) are also present from the early stages of disease, with the cortical variants of PSP tending to show the worst impairment[11, 16], although one study found that cognitive abilities did not evolve significantly with disease course in PSP[14]. Little is currently known about rate of decline in these clinical indices across specific PSP variants. Furthermore, it is unclear whether baseline clinical performance would be useful to help predict rate of clinical decline across a heterogeneous cohort of PSP patients. A previous study that focused on PSP-Richardson found that shorter disease duration and worse performance on baseline clinical evaluation correlated with a more rapid increase in PSP Rating Scale[16]. Correct diagnostic and prognostic stratification of patients is fundamental for caregiver education and insertion into upcoming therapeutic clinical trials.

It is also possible that neuroimaging findings at baseline could help predict subsequent rate of clinical decline. Reduced whole brain volume and midbrain area have been shown to be helpful in predicting clinical evolution in PSP-Richardson patients[17]. It is, however, unclear whether these findings would be useful across PSP variants which show distinct patterns of disease[10, 11]. All variants show volume loss on MRI and tau deposition measured using [18F]flortaucipir PET in the striatum, globus pallidus and thalamus, although differences are observed in brainstem and cortical regions[11]. PSP-Richardson involves the whole subcortical system, with predominant involvement of the midbrain, basal ganglia, superior cerebellar peduncle and thalamus[18], while PSP-parkinsonism and PSP-gait freezing show a predominant subcortical pattern affecting putamen and pallidum[11]. On the other hand, PSP-corticobasal, PSP-frontal and PSP-speech/language show greatest involvement of frontal regions[11].

The primary aim of this study was to determine whether the PSP clinical variants differ in terms of the longitudinal evolution of ocular motor impairment, postural instability, parkinsonism, and cognition. Our secondary aim was to determine whether baseline performance on these domains or baseline MRI and [18F]flortaucipir PET patterns constituted good predictors of disease progression in our cohort.

METHODS

Participants

Ninety-three PSP patients were recruited by the Neurodegenerative Research Group from the Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, between October/2009 and February/2022, and underwent two neurological assessments one year apart. To be recruited into the study all patients must have been over age 40, present with gradual progression of PSP-related symptoms and have an informant to provide independent evaluation of functioning. Patients were diagnosed into one of the different PSP clinical variants at their baseline visit following the MDS-PSP criteria[4]. Diagnostic criteria were applied based on clinical judgment and using operational definitions that we have previously published[19] to determine whether a patient meets each level of the ocular motor, postural instability, and akinesia sections of the MDS-PSP criteria. Patients evaluated before 2017 (N=53) received a retrospective sub-diagnosis based on the same criteria. The MAX criteria were used in cases of uncertainty [20]. Out of 93 patients, 46 were diagnosed with probable PSP-Richardson, 9 with probable PSP-parkinsonism, 3 with PSP-frontal (two probable at both visits, one possible at baseline and probable at follow-up), 6 with possible PSP-corticobasal, 22 with PSP-speech/language (8 suggestive and 14 possible at baseline and at follow-up all 22 met criteria for possible PSP-speech/language; 19 also evolved to meet criteria for either probable PSP-parkinsonism or probable PSP-Richardson), 3 with PSP-gait freezing (one probable and two possible at both visits), and 2 with suggestive PSP-postural. In addition, 2 patients were diagnosed with PSP-corticospinal [10]; this variant of PSP is not recognized in the MDS-PSP criteria. The PSP-corticobasal, PSP-speech/language, and PSP-frontal variants were grouped as PSP-cortical, and the PSP-parkinsonism, PSP-gait freezing, PSP-postural and PSP-corticospinal variants were grouped as PSP-subcortical.

The study was approved by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board, and all individuals consented for participation in the study.

Clinical assessments

The clinical outcomes for this longitudinal study were the PSP Rating Scale [12] to index disease severity, the MDS-UPDRS III [13] to assess motor parkinsonism, and the MoCA to assess cognition[21]. Furthermore, two subscores were extrapolated from the PSP Rating Scale; PSP Rating Scale gait and midline subscore (PSP Rating Scale-GM) for balance and coordination, and PSP Rating Scale ocular motor subscore (PSP Rating Scale-OM) for gaze abnormalities. All patients had completed baseline and follow-up evaluations with all clinical outcome measures.

Neuroimaging

All but three patients underwent a 3T head MRI and 46 patients underwent [18F] flortaucipir PET at the baseline visit. Flortaucipir scans were performed a median of 1 day (inter-quartile range 0–1) from the MRI. Two patients did not receive radiological assessment at baseline and one MRI did not pass the quality control (1 PSP-PI, 2 PSP-RS), making for a total of n=90 MRI scans. Patients underwent a standardized MRI protocol at 3T that included a magnetization prepared rapid gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence. Tau-PET scans were acquired using a PET/CT scanner (GE Healthcare) operating in 3D mode. An intravenous bolus injection of 370MBq (range 333–407 MBq) of [18F]flortaucipir was administered, followed by a 20-minute PET acquisition performed 80-minutes after injection. All MPRAGE scans were reverse-normalized to the Mayo Clinic Adult Lifespan Template (MCALT) using Advanced Normalization Tools[22] and segmented via unified segmentation[23] with MCALT priors/settings. Flortaucipir images were co-registered to the MPRAGE using 6°-of-freedom registration in SPM12.

Region-level data was outputted to assess specific structures of interest. The MCALT atlas was used to assess subcortical grey matter structures (thalamus, putamen and caudate) and cortical regions of interest (supplementary motor area, superior frontal gyrus, precentral cortex). These regions were selected as they have proven useful in the distinction of PSP variants[11]. The Deep Brain Stimulation Intrinsic Template[24] atlas was used to assess the subthalamic nucleus and in-house developed midbrain and cerebellar dentate nucleus atlases were utilized[11]. Using the parameters from normalizing the MPRAGE scans to the MCALT template, the atlases were propagated to native MPRAGE space and used to output region-level data for volume and flortaucipir. Total intracranial volume (TVI) was also measured to allow the correction for head size in the MRI analyses. Flortaucipir uptake values were divided by uptake in the cerebellar crus grey matter to create standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs). Region-level flortaucipir analyses were assessed after performing a two-compartment partial volume correction. Manual measurements of midbrain and pons area, and width of superior cerebellar peduncle and middle cerebellar peduncle, were also performed using the MPRAGE scans, as previously described[10]. The midbrain/pons ratio was computed as midbrain area divided by pons area. The MRI parkinsonism index (MRPI)[25] was calculated as the product between the midbrain/pons ratio and the ratio of middle cerebellar peduncle to superior cerebellar peduncle width.

Statistics

Our primary analysis of clinical scores assessed differences across PSP-Richardson, PSP-cortical and PSP-subcortical groups in terms of baseline, follow-up, and rate of change which was calculated for each test by subtracting participants’ follow-up test scores from their baseline test scores and dividing this by the time in years between baseline and follow-up. Because participants differed in terms of time from initial symptoms to baseline, and because this was a potential confounder, we compared groups on baseline, follow-up, and rate of change using a linear regression model with a group-by-duration interaction. Our inferences were based on comparing groups at a common duration of 4 years. Our secondary analysis assessed differences across the specific PSP clinical variants. In the secondary analysis, the PSP-postural, PSP-gait freezing, PSP-frontal and PSP-corticospinal variants were grouped together as PSP-other due to small numbers of patients in each variant.

We used linear regression to estimate the mean annual rate of change for each test as a function of baseline imaging measures. Except for MRPI and the midbrain to pons area ratio, baseline imaging measures were log transformed to reduce skewness and so that the regional volumes and SUVR values were all on a similar scale. For models involving baseline MRI measures, we included age, TIV, MRI manufacturer (72% performed on GE versus 28% on Siemens) and individual MRI scanner as covariates. For models involving tau PET, we included age as a covariate. The pallidum, subthalamic nucleus and cerebellar dentate were excluded from the MRI models due to their small size and large observed variability in volume estimates. Regression analyses were done using R version 4.1.3 and penalized estimation was done using the bayesglm function in the arm package for R.

Data sharing

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

RESULTS

Results across PSP-Richardson, PSP-subcortical and PSP-cortical groups

PSP groups did not differ by sex and visit interval, although there were differences in age at onset, age at baseline and time from onset to first reported symptom (Table 1). PSP-cortical had older age at onset and baseline than both PSP-Richardson and PSP-Subcortical, and a longer time from onset to first reported symptom than PSP-Richardson.

The baseline, follow-up, and rate of change in the clinical outcome measures are shown in Table 1 and Figure 1. Total PSP Rating Scale follow-up score and annualized rate of change differed across groups, with PSP-Subcortical showing lower scores at follow-up and slower rate of progression compared to both PSP-Richardson and PSP-Cortical. The PSP Rating Scale-GM score differed across groups at baseline, follow-up and in rates of change, with PSP-Richardson showing higher scores at baseline compared to PSP-Cortical and higher scores at follow-up compared to both other groups. Rates of change in the PSP Rating Scale-GM score was slower in PSP-Subcortical compared to PSP-Cortical. The PSP Rating Scale-OM score differed across groups both at baseline and follow-up, with PSP-Subcortical showing less ocular motor impairment than both other groups at both time points. Furthermore, PSP-Cortical showed less ocular motor impairment than PSP-Richardson at follow-up.

The MoCA differed across groups at follow-up, with PSP-Cortical showing worse cognitive performance compared to PSP-Subcortical. There was also some evidence that PSP-Richardson showed worse cognitive performance than PSP-Subcortical at baseline. No significant differences were observed in MDS-UPDRS III scores or rate of progression across groups, although there was evidence that PSP-Subcortical had lower scores than PSP-Richardson at follow-up.

Sample size estimates per treatment arm for a placebo-controlled treatment trial are shown in Table 2. The MDS-UPDRS III, PSP Rating Scale total and PSP Rating Scale-GM displayed the smallest sample size estimates for the detection of a 25% reduction in annual progression in PSP-Richardson and PSP-Cortical. The total PSP Rating Scale provided the smallest sample size estimates in PSP-Richardson, while the PSP Rating Scale-GM performed the best in PSP-Cortical. The scales performed poorly in the PSP-Subcortical group.

Results across specific PSP variants

Data from our secondary analysis of distinct PSP variants are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. Baseline and follow-up PSP Rating Scale-OM scores differed across groups, with PSP-Richardson showing greater ocular motor impairment than both PSP-speech/language and PSP-parkinsonism. The PSP Rating Scale-GM scores differed across groups at baseline, with PSP-speech/language showing lower scores than PSP-parkinsonism and PSP-Richardson.

Baseline predictors of clinical change across the whole cohort

Significant relationships were observed between baseline performance and rate of change for total PSP-Rating Scale, PSP Rating Scale-OM, PSP Rating Scale-GM and MDS-UPDRS III (p&lt;0.001 for all) (Supplementary Figure 1). For all measures, worse baseline performance was related to slower progression over time. No significant relationships were observed between disease duration at baseline and rate of change in any of the clinical outcome measures (Supplementary Figure 2).

Greater baseline flortaucipir uptake in the precentral (motor) cortex and supplementary motor area correlated with greater rates of progression in MDS-UPDRS III (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 3), with trends for similar relationships with PSP Rating Scale-GM and total PSP Rating Scale. Greater flortaucipir uptake in the supplementary motor area was also correlated with more rapid decline in MoCA (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 3). Baseline flortaucipir uptake in the midbrain correlated with greater rates of progression in total PSP Rating Scale (Figure 2 and Supplementary Figure 3). Similar results were obtained when analyzing PET data without partial volume correction. Very few relationships were observed with baseline MRI volumes. The only significant correlation was observed between larger baseline midbrain volumes and greater rates of progression in PSP Rating Scale-OM.

DISCUSSION

This study assessed longitudinal progression of the PSP Rating Scale, MDS-UPDRS III and MoCA across the PSP spectrum. We observed differences in these outcomes across PSP-Richardson, PSP-Cortical and PSP-Subcortical groups. PSP-Subcortical displayed a slower rate of progression in overall PSP severity and in motor scales, and milder ocular motor impairment compared to the other groups, while PSP-Cortical was characterized by greater cognitive impairment. Baseline [18F]flortaucipir PET findings may provide useful predictors of clinical decline across the PSP spectrum.

The PSP Rating Scale-OM score demonstrated significant differences at baseline across all PSP groups, while the other tests remained more comparable. The PSP-Richardson variant demonstrated the greatest oculomotor impairment at both baseline and follow-up, with the PSP-Subcortical group showing the least impairment at both time points. When looking within the PSP-Subcortical group, PSP-parkinsonism showed lower ocular motor scores compared to PSP-Richardson, and low scores were observed in PSP-gait freezing, PSP-postural and PSP-corticospinal, demonstrating that relatively preserved ocular motor function is a consistent feature of the PSP-subcortical variants. To some degree these findings may reflect the diagnostic criteria, since presence of slowing of vertical saccades is not required for patients to meet a diagnosis of possible PSP-gait/freezing or suggestive of PSP-postural, and ocular motor impairments are not a striking feature of PSP-corticospinal[10]. However, slowing of vertical saccades is required for a diagnosis of probable PSP-parkinsonism, yet these patients still had less abnormalities than the other groups. The PSP-speech/language group also showed less ocular motor impairment compared to PSP-Richardson at follow-up. These data are consistent with previous findings of later onset of ocular motor symptoms in PSP-parkinsonism[16] and PSP-speech/language[11, 19]. Interestingly, the rate of change in PSP Rating Scale-OM score was similar across all variants implying that once oculomotor symptoms arise, their rate of progression is comparable across PSP variants, at least over the period of the disease that we assess in this study.

In contrast, rates of change in the total PSP Rating Scale and PSP Rating Scale-GM differed across PSP groups. The PSP-Subcortical patients showed the slowest rate of progression, as well as the lowest total PSP Rating Scale score at follow-up. We also demonstrate slow rates of progression in PSP-parkinsonism compared to the other PSP variants. This finding matched the slow clinical progression of PSP-Subcortical patients in previous studies[16, 26], and the fact that long disease duration in PSP has been associated with absence of ocular motor abnormalities within the first 3 years from disease onset [27]. Pathological studies have suggested that slow progression in PSP is associated with lower density of glial pathology in the brain [27], and PSP-parkinsonism indeed shows a low degree of glial involvement[28]. The PSP-Cortical patients showed high rates of change in the PSP Rating Scale-GM. Within the PSP-Cortical group, particularly fast rates were observed in the PSP-speech/language patients. Taking into consideration their longer disease duration, we can infer that PSP-speech/language patients have a late but rapid deterioration of gait once they develop PSP features. We may also be more likely to capture this rapid decline because many of the PSP-speech/language patients were followed prior to developing PSP features. On the contrary, the low rate of progression of the PSP-Subcortical group in this measure supported the slow evolution of these variants, especially PSP-parkinsonism[29]. The differences across groups in MDS-UPDRS III rate of change mirrored the findings of the PSP Rating Scale-GM but did not reach significance, which led us to believe that the PSP Rating Scale-GM could be a more sensitive tool for the distinction between PSP variants. A previous study has confirmed that the PSP Rating Scale-GM is a sensitive measure of gait abnormalities in PSP using objective measures of gait[30].

Concurring with previous studies[16], the PSP-Cortical group demonstrated the most abnormal MoCA scores at follow-up, with the PSP-speech/language patients showing the worst scores. These findings concord with previous reports on early cognitive decline in PSP-speech/language[19] and are likely due to the frontal predominance of atrophy[11] and neuropathological tau burden[7, 28] in the PSP-Cortical variants. However, we did not observe a difference in rates of decline in MoCA scores, demonstrating that cognitive decline is a common feature across PSP variants. While we did not aim to assess performance on other cortically mediated tests, such as speech/language measures, behavioral abnormalities, or cortical signs, previous studies have demonstrated that these features differ cross-sectionally across variants in-line with the diagnostic classifications[11]. Future studies will be needed to determine whether the cortical PSP variants remain distinct from PSP-Richardson and the PSP-subcortical variants on these features over time.

The MDS-UPDRS III, total PSP Rating Scale and the PSP Rating Scale-GM provided the smallest sample size estimates required to detect a 25% change in the annualized rate of disease progression in a hypothetical clinical trial, although variability in performance of these outcome measures was observed across PSP groups. The MDS-UPDRS III and total PSP Rating Scale performed the best in the PSP-Richardson group, concurring with previous studies[15, 31]. However, the PSP Rating Scale-GM provided the smallest sample size estimates in the PSP-Cortical group, reflecting the fact that this group showed rapid change in this outcome measure. None of the scales showed efficacy in the subcortical variants due to the slow rates of disease progression observed in these patients. It is, therefore, critical that variability in clinical progression and performance across clinical outcome measures be considered in future clinical treatment trials that recruit patients from across the PSP spectrum, and our findings could help guide the inclusion of appropriate outcome measures.

We also assessed baseline predictors of progression across our outcome measures. We found that worse baseline performance was associated with slower rates of progression over time in all clinical outcomes, except for MoCA. This might, however, reflect a ceiling effect within these clinical measures, whereby patients have already reached ceiling performance in many of the sub sections of the tests that reflect their predominant symptoms. It is also possible that clinical decline occurs in a non-linear fashion, with rapid early change followed by slower rates of change later in the disease course. Hence, patients that perform relatively better on these outcome measures at baseline may be earlier in the disease course and then show rapid subsequent change. The fact that disease duration did not correlate with rate of progression may be due to the heterogeneity of our population, with the PSP-Parkinsonism and PSP-speech/language groups developing PSP features later in their disease course.

We found evidence that baseline flortaucipir uptake in specific regions could be useful predictors of future decline. Rate of progression in the MDS-UPDRS III was correlated with baseline flortaucipir uptake in motor and premotor areas, whereby greater flortaucipir uptake was related to faster rates of progression. These findings were supported by a previous study that showed that gait abnormalities were associated with atrophy in the precentral and supplementary motor area, among others, in PSP[30]. However, in our study, it is possible that the correlation might have been driven in part by the PSP-Cortical variants which showed a trend for greatest annualized increase in MDS-UPDRS III and are more likely to show flortaucipir uptake in the motor cortex and supplementary motor area[11]. Our finding is further supported by the trend in correlation found between these imaging measures and rates of progression of the PSP Rating Scale-GM. Baseline flortaucipir uptake in the supplementary motor area was also associated with greater rate of progression in the MoCA which could also be driven by the PSP-Cortical group which displayed the greatest decline in cognition at follow-up. Greater midbrain flortaucipir uptake at baseline correlated with a more rapid progression in the total PSP Rating Scale, which supports our previous hypothesis on the utility of midbrain measurements as predictors of disease progression in PSP[10, 17]. Generally, we observed very few relationships between baseline MRI volume and rates of clinical progression, perhaps indicating a greater sensitivity of [18F]flortaucipir PET in detection of earlier patterns of cerebral involvement in PSP. The surprising finding whereby larger midbrain volumes was related to faster rates of decline in the PSP Rating Scale-OM, reflects a degree of confounding. Individuals with lower midbrain volumes were indeed performing worse at both baseline and follow-up, as expected, but individuals with higher baseline ocular motor scores tended to worsen slower prompting the inverse association.

Strengths of our study include the large PSP cohort that included many different clinical variants of PSP, and that the fact that all patients had complete longitudinal clinical data and available baseline neuroimaging. Our analysis also corrected for differences in disease duration across groups. Some limitations that should be considered are that longitudinal progression was only assessed over 12 months, and it is possible that we captured different disease stages in the different PSP variants. Furthermore, the cohort lacked autopsy confirmation and the pathological underpinnings could be heterogeneous, particularly in the suggestive of PSP-postural instability and PSP-corticospinal groups given the lack of ocular motor impairment required for a possible PSP categorization[2, 32–35]. We were also not able to rule out the presence of Alzheimer’s disease in the PSP-corticobasal variant due to lack of CSF biomarkers or amyloid PET (only two of the PSP-corticobasal patients had undergone amyloid PET; both were negative). Limitations of the imaging component included the fact that the correlations between baseline metrics and rates of change were carried out on the entire population, which might have shifted the data in favor of more represented variants. While flortaucipir provided potential metrics to help predict rate of decline, there is uncertainty as to whether flortaucipir uptake reflects underlying 4R tau burden or off-target binding in PSP (as recently reviewed in detail)[36]. Given these limitations, findings from this study need to validated in independent cohorts.

Our results have important implications for diagnosis and prognosis in PSP. They suggest a relatively slow rate of progression in the subcortical variants of PSP, and a more rapid evolution in motor symptoms in the cortical variants. In addition to the importance of clinical variant, baseline regional flortaucipir uptake could be informative to help predict rate of progression in patients with PSP. Furthermore, our results show that PSP clinical variant should be considered when deciding upon appropriate clinical outcome measures in clinical treatment trials.

Supplementary Material

1

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers R01-NS89757, R01-DC12519, R01-DC14942 and R21-NS94684], and the Dana Foundation. The funding source had no role in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the decision to submit the article for publication. We would like to acknowledge AVID Radiopharmaceuticals for provision of AV-1451 precursor, chemistry production advice and oversight, and FDA regulatory cross-filing permission and documentation needed for this work.

Figure 1: Clinical evolution over time in PSP-Richardson, PSP-Cortical and PSP-Subcortical. On the left, clinical scores from baseline (BL) and follow-up (FL) for each PSP group are shown. On the right, clinical rate of change for each PSP group is shown. Boxes represent the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles; whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum values. All individual patients are shown on the plot with specific PSP clinical variant color-coded. Abbreviations: MDS-UPDRS III, Movement Disorder Society sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinsonism Disorder Scale; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment.

Figure 2: Annual rate of change on clinical tests versus regional tau PET SUVR values. The regression lines and 95% CIs are from a linear regression model. Abbreviations: GM, gait/midline; MDS-UPDRS III, Movement Disorder Society sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinsonism Disorder Scale; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; SUVR, standardized value uptake ratios; SMA, supplementary motor are.

Table 1: Demographic and clinical findings across PSP-Richardson, PSP-Cortical and PSP-Subcortical groups

Diagnosis	PSP-Richardson (n=46)	PSP-Cortical (n=31)	PSP-Subcortical (n=16)	P-value*	
N (Female%)	21 (46%)	21 (68%)	8 (50%)	0.15	
Age at first reported symptom, years	65 (60, 69)	70 (65, 72)	63.5 (56.7, 69.7)	0.02ac	
Age at baseline	69.2 (64.2, 73.4)	75.3 (71.1, 78)	70 (61.1, 73.7)	0.001ac	
Time from first reported symptom to baseline, years	3.4 (2.5, 4)	4.7 (3,5.8)	3.8 (2.2, 6.2)	0.01a	
Baseline to follow-up, years	1.0 (1.0, 1.1)	1.0 (1.0, 1.2)	1.0 (1.0, 1.1)	0.42	
MDS-UPDRS III	Baseline	42 (37, 46)	37 (32, 43)	38 (31, 46)	0.48	
Follow-up	56 (51, 61)	57 (51, 63)	47 (39, 55)	0.10b	
Rate of change/yr	14 (10, 18)	15 (10, 20)	8 (2, 14)	0.16	
PSP Rating Scale	Baseline	38 (34, 43)	36 (30, 41)	32 (25, 38)	0.25	
Follow-up	50 (46, 55)	49 (44, 55)	36 (30, 43)	0.001bc	
Rate of change/yr	11 (8, 14)	12 (8, 15)	4 (−1, 9)	0.02bc	
PSP Rating Scale-GM	Baseline	12 (10, 13)	9 (6, 11)	11 (8, 13)	0.03a	
Follow-up	15 (14, 17)	13 (11, 15)	12 (10, 14)	0.02ab	
Rate of change/yr	3 (2, 4)	4 (3, 5)	2 (0, 3)	0.06c	
PSP Rating Scale-OM	Baseline	8 (7, 9)	7 (5, 8)	3 (2, 5)	&lt;0.001bc	
Follow-up	10 (9, 10)	8 (7, 9)	4 (3, 5)	&lt;0.001abc	
Rate of change/yr	1 (1, 2)	1 (0, 2)	1 (0, 2)	0.62	

MoCA	Baseline	23 (22, 25)	23 (21, 25)	26 (24, 28)	0.11b	
Follow-up	21 (19, 23)	19 (17, 22)	24 (21, 27)	0.05c	
Rate of change/yr †	−2 (−3, −1)	−3 (−5, −2)	−2 (−4, 0)	0.31	
Data are shown as n (%) or median (inter-quartile range) except for baseline, follow-up, and rate of change estimates which are means and 95% CIs based on linear regression models with a time from self-reported initial symptoms to baseline of four years.

* Based on chi-squared test for sex; ANOVA for age at onset, age at baseline, and disease duration; Kruskal-Wallis for baseline to follow-up due to skewness; duration-adjusted linear regression for baseline, follow-up, and rate of change on clinical scores.

† MoCA change scores shown as negative values since scores decline over time from a maximum and normal score of 30

a PSP-Richardson differs from PSP-Cortical at p&lt;0.05

b PSP-Richardson differs from PSP-Subcortical at p&lt;0.05

c PSP-Cortical differs from PSP-Subcortical at p&lt;0.05

Abbreviations: MDS-UPDRS III, Movement Disorder Society sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinsonism Disorder Scale; PSPS Rating Scale-GM, PSP Rating Scale gait-midline subscore; PSP Rating Scale-OM, PSP Rating Scale oculomotor subscore; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment.

Table 2: Sample size estimates for the clinical outcome measures across PSP groups

Clinical test	All	PSP-RS	PSP-Cortical	PSP-Subcortical	
	
MDS-UPDRS III	201	136	181	714	
PSP Rating Scale	202	123	205	763	
PSP Rating Scale Gait/Midline	207	184	113	1004	
PSP Rating Scale Ocular Motor	720	341	1142	3064	
Montreal Cognitive Assessment	587	851	348	601	
Estimated sample size needed in each arm for a hypothetical clinical trial designed to have 80% power to detect a 25% reduction in the annual rate of change on a clinical test. Estimates assume a two-sided test with an alpha of 0.05. Sample sizes are based on the observed mean and standard deviation. Abbreviations: MDS-UPDRS III, Movement Disorder Society sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinsonism Disorder Scale.

Highlights

Subcortical variants of PSP show the slowest rates of clinical progression

Cortical variants of PSP show fastest decline in motor symptoms

Sample size estimates for treatment trials differ across PSP variants

Tau-PET uptake in midbrain and motor cortex predict rates of clinical decline

Financial disclosures

Dr. Pavone reports no disclosures.

Stephen W. Weigand reports no disclosures

Dr. Ali received funding from the NIH.

Dr. Clark received funding from the NIH.

Dr. Botha received funding from the NIH.

Dr. Machulda received funding from the NIH

Dr. Savica reports no disclosures

Nha Trang Thu Pham reports no disclosures

Rosalie M. Grijalva reports no disclosures

Dr. Schwarz received funding from the NIH.

Matthew L. Senjem owned stocks in Align Technology, Inc., Inovio Biomedical Corp., Mesa Laboratories, Inc.

Dr. Agosta is Associate Editor of NeuroImage: Clinical, has received speaker honoraria from Biogen Idec and Roche, and receives or has received research supports from the Italian Ministry of Health, AriSLA (Fondazione Italiana di Ricerca per la SLA), the European Research Council and Foundation Research on Alzheimer Disease.

Dr. Filippi is Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Neurology and Associate Editor of Human Brain Mapping, received compensation for consulting services and/or speaking activities from Almiral, Alexion, Bayer, Biogen, Celgene, Eli Lilly, Genzyme, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, Takeda, and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, and receives research support from Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Italian Ministry of Health, Fondazione Italiana Sclerosi Multipla, and ARiSLA (Fondazione Italiana di Ricerca per la SLA).

Dr. Jack received funding from the NIH.

Dr. Lowe reported receiving research support from GE Healthcare, Siemens Molecular Imaging, AVID Radiopharmaceuticals, and the NIH (NIA, NCI).

Dr. Josephs received funding from the NIH

Dr. Whitwell received funding from the NIH

Declarations of interest: None

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


BIBLIOGRAPHY

[1] Hauw J-J , Daniel SE , Dickson D , Horoupian DS , Jellinger K , Lantos PL , McKee A , Tabaton M , Litvan I , Preliminary NINDS neuropathologic criteria for Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome (progressive supranuclear palsy), Neurology 44 (11 ) (1994) 2015–2015.7969952
[2] Höglinger GA-O , Respondek G , Stamelou MA-O , Kurz C , Josephs KA , Lang AE , Mollenhauer B , Müller U , Nilsson C , Whitwell JL , Arzberger T , Englund E , Gelpi E , Giese A , Irwin DJ , Meissner WA-O , Pantelyat A , Rajput A , van Swieten JC , Troakes C , Antonini A , Bhatia KA-OX , Bordelon Y , Compta Y , Corvol JC , Colosimo C , Dickson DW , Dodel R , Ferguson L , Grossman M , Kassubek J , Krismer F , Levin J , Lorenzl S , Morris HR , Nestor P , Oertel WH , Poewe W , Rabinovici G , Rowe JB , Schellenberg GD , Seppi K , van Eimeren T , Wenning GK , Boxer AL , Golbe LI , Litvan I , Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder society criteria, (1531–8257 (Electronic)) (2017).
[3] Respondek G , Stamelou M , Kurz C , Ferguson LW , Rajput A , Chiu WZ , van Swieten JC , Troakes C , al Sarraj S , Gelpi E , Gaig C , Tolosa E , Oertel WH , Giese A , Roeber S , Arzberger T , Wagenpfeil S , Höglinger GU , f.t.M.D.S.e.P.S. Group, The phenotypic spectrum of progressive supranuclear palsy: A retrospective multicenter study of 100 definite cases, Movement Disorders 29 (14 ) (2014) 1758–1766.25370486
[4] Höglinger GA-O , Respondek G , Stamelou MA-O , Kurz C , Josephs KA , Lang AE , Mollenhauer B , Müller U , Nilsson C , Whitwell JL , Arzberger T , Englund E , Gelpi E , Giese A , Irwin DJ , Meissner WA-O , Pantelyat A , Rajput A , van Swieten JC , Troakes C , Antonini A , Bhatia KA-OX , Bordelon Y , Compta Y , Corvol JC , Colosimo C , Dickson DW , Dodel R , Ferguson L , Grossman M , Kassubek J , Krismer F , Levin J , Lorenzl S , Morris HR , Nestor P , Oertel WH , Poewe W , Rabinovici G , Rowe JB , Schellenberg GD , Seppi K , van Eimeren T , Wenning GK , Boxer AL , Golbe LI , Litvan I , Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: The movement disorder society criteria, (1531–8257 (Electronic)).
[5] Williams DR , de Silva R , Paviour DC , Pittman A , Watt HC , Kilford L , Holton JL , Revesz T , Lees AJ , Characteristics of two distinct clinical phenotypes in pathologically proven progressive supranuclear palsy: Richardson’s syndrome and PSP-parkinsonism, Brain 128 (6 ) (2005) 1247–1258.15788542
[6] Josephs KA , Eggers SDZ , Jack CR Jr , Whitwell JL , Neuroanatomical correlates of the progressive supranuclear palsy corticobasal syndrome hybrid, European Journal of Neurology 19 (11 ) (2012) 1440–1446.22519566
[7] Josephs KA , Boeve BF , Duffy JR , Smith GE , Knopman DS , Parisi JE , Petersen RC , Dickson DW , Atypical progressive supranuclear palsy underlying progressive apraxia of speech and nonfluent aphasia, Neurocase 11 (4 ) (2005) 283–296.16093229
[8] Hassan A , Parisi JE , Josephs KA , Autopsy-proven progressive supranuclear palsy presenting as behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia, Neurocase 18 (6 ) (2012) 478–488.22181323
[9] Owens E , Josephs KA , Savica R , Hassan A , Klassen B , Bower J , Maraganore D , Matsumoto J , Ahlskog JE , The clinical spectrum and natural history of pure akinesia with gait freezing, (1432–1459 (Electronic)).
[10] Grijalva RM , Pham NTT , Huang Q , Martin PR , Ali F , Clark HM , Duffy JR , Utianski RL , Botha H , Machulda MM , Weigand SD , Ahlskog JE , Dickson DW , Josephs KA , Whitwell JL , Brainstem Biomarkers of Clinical Variant and Pathology in Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, Mov Disord 37 (4 ) (2022) 702–712.34970796
[11] Whitwell JL , Tosakulwong N , Botha H , Ali F , Clark HM , Duffy JR , Utianski RL , Stevens CA , Weigand SD , Schwarz CG , Senjem ML , Jack CR , Lowe VJ , Ahlskog JE , Dickson DW , Josephs KA , Brain volume and flortaucipir analysis of progressive supranuclear palsy clinical variants, Neuroimage Clin 25 (2020) 102152.31935638
[12] Golbe LI , Ohman-Strickland PA , A clinical rating scale for progressive supranuclear palsy, Brain 130 (Pt 6 ) (2007) 1552–65.17405767
[13] Martínez-Martín P , Gil-Nagel A Fau - Gracia LM , Gracia Lm Fau - Gómez JB , Gómez Jb Fau - Martínez-Sarriés J , Martínez-Sarriés J Fau - Bermejo F , Bermejo F , Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale characteristics and structure. The Cooperative Multicentric Group, (0885–3185 (Print)).
[14] Pereira MF , Buchanan T , Hoglinger GU , Bogdanovic M , Tofaris G , Prangnell S , Sarangmat N , FitzGerald JJ , Antoniades CA , Longitudinal changes of early motor and cognitive symptoms in progressive supranuclear palsy: the OxQUIP study, BMJ Neurol Open 4 (1 ) (2022) e000214.
[15] Whitwell JL , Xu J , Mandrekar JN , Gunter JL , Jack CR Jr. , Josephs KA , Rates of brain atrophy and clinical decline over 6 and 12-month intervals in PSP: determining sample size for treatment trials, Parkinsonism Relat Disord 18 (3 ) (2012) 252–6.22079523
[16] Jabbari E , Holland N , Chelban V , Jones PS , Lamb R , Rawlinson C , Guo T , Costantini AA , Tan MMX , Heslegrave AJ , Roncaroli F , Klein JC , Ansorge O , Allinson KSJ , Jaunmuktane Z , Holton JL , Revesz T , Warner TT , Lees AJ , Zetterberg H , Russell LL , Bocchetta M , Rohrer JD , Williams NM , Grosset DG , Burn DJ , Pavese N , Gerhard A , Kobylecki C , Leigh PN , Church A , Hu MTM , Woodside J , Houlden H , Rowe JB , Morris HR , Diagnosis Across the Spectrum of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy and Corticobasal Syndrome, JAMA Neurol 77 (3 ) (2020) 377–387.31860007
[17] Whitwell JL , Xu J , Mandrekar J , Gunter JL , Jack CR Jr. , Josephs KA , Imaging measures predict progression in progressive supranuclear palsy, Mov Disord 27 (14 ) (2012) 1801–4.22415715
[18] Whitwell JL , Hoglinger GU , Antonini A , Bordelon Y , Boxer AL , Colosimo C , van Eimeren T , Golbe LI , Kassubek J , Kurz C , Litvan I , Pantelyat A , Rabinovici G , Respondek G , Rominger A , Rowe JB , Stamelou M , Josephs KA , P.S.P.S.G. , Movement Disorder Society-endorsed, Radiological biomarkers for diagnosis in PSP: Where are we and where do we need to be?, Mov Disord 32 (7 ) (2017) 955–971.28500751
[19] Whitwell JL , Stevens CA , Duffy JR , Clark HM , Machulda MM , Strand EA , Martin PR , Utianski RL , Botha H , Spychalla AJ , Senjem ML , Schwarz CG , Jack CR Jr. , Ali F , Hassan A , Josephs KA , An Evaluation of the Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Speech/Language Variant, Mov Disord Clin Pract 6 (6 ) (2019) 452–461.31392246
[20] Grimm MJ , Respondek G , Stamelou M , Arzberger T , Ferguson L , Gelpi E , Giese A , Grossman M , Irwin DJ , Pantelyat A , Rajput A , Roeber S , van Swieten JC , Troakes C , Antonini A , Bhatia KP , Colosimo C , van Eimeren T , Kassubek J , Levin J , Meissner WG , Nilsson C , Oertel WH , Piot I , Poewe W , Wenning GK , Boxer A , Golbe LI , Josephs KA , Litvan I , Morris HR , Whitwell JL , Compta Y , Corvol JC , Lang AE , Rowe JB , Hoglinger GU , P.S.P.S.G. Movement Disorder Society-endorsed, How to apply the movement disorder society criteria for diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy, Mov Disord 34 (8 ) (2019) 1228–1232.30884545
[21] Nasreddine ZS , Phillips NA , Bedirian V , Charbonneau S , Whitehead V , Collin I , Cummings JL , Chertkow H , The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment, J Am Geriatr Soc 53 (4 ) (2005) 695–9.15817019
[22] Avants BB , Epstein CL , Grossman M , Gee JC , Symmetric diffeomorphic image registration with cross-correlation: evaluating automated labeling of elderly and neurodegenerative brain, Med Image Anal 12 (1 ) (2008) 26–41.17659998
[23] Ashburner J , Friston KJ , Unified segmentation, Neuroimage 26 (3 ) (2005) 839–51.15955494
[24] Ewert S , Plettig P , Li N , Chakravarty MM , Collins DL , Herrington TM , Kuhn AA , Horn A , Toward defining deep brain stimulation targets in MNI space: A subcortical atlas based on multimodal MRI, histology and structural connectivity, Neuroimage 170 (2018) 271–282.28536045
[25] Quattrone A , Morelli M , Nigro S , Quattrone A , Vescio B , Arabia G , Nicoletti G , Nistico R , Salsone M , Novellino F , Barbagallo G , Le Piane E , Pugliese P , Bosco D , Vaccaro MG , Chiriaco C , Sabatini U , Vescio V , Stana C , Rocca F , Gulla D , Caracciolo M , A new MR imaging index for differentiation of progressive supranuclear palsy-parkinsonism from Parkinson’s disease, Parkinsonism Relat Disord 54 (2018) 3–8.30068492
[26] Shoeibi A , Litvan I , Tolosa E , Ser TD , Lee E , Investigators T , Progression of two Progressive Supranuclear Palsy phenotypes with comparable initial disability, Parkinsonism Relat Disord 66 (2019) 87–93.31307919
[27] Lukic MJ , Respondek G , Kurz C , Compta Y , Gelpi E , Ferguson LW , Rajput A , Troakes C , M.D.-e.P.s. group, van Swieten JC , Giese A , Roeber S , Herms J , Arzberger T , Hoglinger G , Long-Duration Progressive Supranuclear Palsy: Clinical Course and Pathological Underpinnings, Ann Neurol 92 (4 ) (2022) 637–649.35872640
[28] Kovacs GG , Lukic MJ , Irwin DJ , Arzberger T , Respondek G , Lee EB , Coughlin D , Giese A , Grossman M , Kurz C , McMillan CT , Gelpi E , Compta Y , van Swieten JC , Laat LD , Troakes C , Al-Sarraj S , Robinson JL , Roeber S , Xie SX , Lee VM , Trojanowski JQ , Hoglinger GU , Distribution patterns of tau pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy, Acta Neuropathol 140 (2 ) (2020) 99–119.32383020
[29] O’Sullivan SS , Massey LA , Williams DR , Silveira-Moriyama L , Kempster PA , Holton JL , Revesz T , Lees AJ , Clinical outcomes of progressive supranuclear palsy and multiple system atrophy, Brain 131 (Pt 5 ) (2008) 1362–72.18385183
[30] Sintini I , Kaufman K , Botha H , Martin PR , Loushin SR , Senjem ML , Reid RI , Schwarz CG , Jack CR Jr. , Lowe VJ , Josephs KA , Whitwell JL , Ali F , Neuroimaging correlates of gait abnormalities in progressive supranuclear palsy, Neuroimage Clin 32 (2021) 102850.34655905
[31] Stamelou M , Schope J , Wagenpfeil S , Del Ser T , Bang J , Lobach IY , Luong P , Respondek G , Oertel WH , Boxer A , Hoglinger GU , T.I. Al-108–231 Investigators, M.D.-E.P.S. Group, Power calculations and placebo effect for future clinical trials in progressive supranuclear palsy, Mov Disord 31 (5 ) (2016) 742–7.26948290
[32] Grimm MJ , Respondek G , Stamelou M , Arzberger T , Ferguson L , Gelpi E , Giese A , Grossman M , Irwin DJ , Pantelyat A , Rajput A , Roeber S , van Swieten JC , Troakes C , Meissner WG , Nilsson C , Piot I , Compta Y , Rowe JB , Hoglinger GU , Movement Disorder Society-Endorsed PSPSG , Clinical Conditions “Suggestive of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy”-Diagnostic Performance, Mov Disord 35 (12 ) (2020) 2301–2313.32914550
[33] Respondek G , Grimm MJ , Piot I , Arzberger T , Compta Y , Englund E , Ferguson LW , Gelpi E , Roeber S , Giese A , Grossman M , Irwin DJ , Meissner WG , Nilsson C , Pantelyat A , Rajput A , van Swieten JC , Troakes C , Hoglinger GU , Movement G Disorder Society-Endorsed Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Study, Validation of the movement disorder society criteria for the diagnosis of 4-repeat tauopathies, Mov Disord 35 (1 ) (2020) 171–176.31571273
[34] Hokelekli FO , Duffy JR , Clark HM , Utianski RL , Botha H , Ali F , Stierwalt JA , Machulda MM , Reichard RR , Dickson DW , Whitwell JL , Josephs KA , Autopsy Validation of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Predominant Speech/Language Disorder Criteria, Mov Disord 37 (1 ) (2022) 213–218.34632629
[35] Ali F , Martin PR , Botha H , Ahlskog JE , Bower JH , Masumoto JY , Maraganore D , Hassan A , Eggers S , Boeve BF , Knopman DS , Drubach D , Petersen RC , Dunkley ED , van Gerpen J , Uitti R , Whitwell JL , Dickson DW , Josephs KA , Sensitivity and Specificity of Diagnostic Criteria for Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, Mov Disord 34 (8 ) (2019) 1144–1153.30726566
[36] Whitwell JL , Tau Imaging in Parkinsonism: What Have We Learned So Far?, Mov Disord Clin Pract 5 (2 ) (2018) 118–130.30035155
