LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101500072
35770
Nat Rev Neurol
Nat Rev Neurol
Nature reviews. Neurology
1759-4758
1759-4766

36316487
9894623
10.1038/s41582-022-00733-7
NIHMS1864321
Article
Observational studies in Alzheimer disease: bridging preclinical studies and clinical trials
Brenowitz Willa D. 1
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0919-3825
Yaffe Kristine 123
1 Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
2 Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
3 San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
Correspondence should be addressed to Kristine Yaffe. kristine.yaffe@ucsf.edu
Author contributions

W.D.B. researched data for the article. All authors contributed substantially to discussion of the content. All authors wrote the article. All authors reviewed and/or edited the manuscript before submission.

22 1 2023
12 2022
31 10 2022
01 12 2023
18 12 747757
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Recent high-profile failures of Alzheimer disease treatments at the clinical trial stage have led to renewed efforts to identify and test novel interventions for Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD). In this Perspective, we highlight the importance of including well-designed observational studies as part of these efforts. Observational research is an important cornerstone for gathering evidence on risk factors and causes of ADRD; this evidence can then be combined with data from preclinical studies and randomized controlled trials to inform the development of effective interventions. Observational study designs can be particularly beneficial for hypothesis generation, posing questions that are unethical or impractical for a trial setting, studying life-course associations, research in populations typically not included in trials, and public health surveillance. Here, we discuss each of these situations in the specific context of ADRD research. We also highlight novel approaches to enhance causal inference and provide a timely discussion on how observational epidemiological studies help provide a bridge between preclinical studies and successful interventions for ADRD.


pmcIntroduction

Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD) are an important and growing problem worldwide; a report published in 2020 estimated that &gt;50 million people have ADRD and that this number will increase to 152 million by 2050 (ref.1). Most individuals with dementia are found to have Alzheimer disease (AD) or AD plus other pathologies at autopsy2. Substantial research efforts have been dedicated to identifying the aetiological causes of ADRD and to developing pharmacological treatments. Evidence indicates that a complex combination of genetic and environmental exposures contributes to cognitive decline and development of dementia3. Estimates suggest that life-course risk factors, such as education, cardiovascular health and physical activity, account for up to 40% of dementia worldwide and that these risk factors could be targeted to reduce dementia prevalence4,5. Numerous treatments and interventions for ADRD have been evaluated in clinical trials, yet the vast majority have failed to slow cognitive decline or dementia progression6. These failures suggest a need to refine our hypotheses around the treatment and prevention of dementia and to address methodological and other challenges to identifying effective treatments. Although in evaluating treatments there is often a focus on preclinical studies and clinical trials7,8, observational research in human participants (for example, studies without interventions) has an important role in knowledge generation. Such studies will be essential if we are to move the field forward towards identifying effective strategies to prevent and slow dementia onset.

Well-designed observational studies are essential to bridge the gaps between preclinical studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and to provide real-world data. Here, we use the term preclinical studies to refer to studies that investigate disease mechanisms or contribute to drug discovery and drug development prior to testing in human participants. These preclinical studies primarily test cell lines, animal-based models or human biospecimens in a controlled environment. Although preclinical studies are crucial for knowledge and hypothesis generation, their results have limited generalizability to human populations and require confirmation in human participants; indeed, most dementia therapies that have produced promising preclinical results have not been successful in RCTs6,9.

The efficacy and safety of a novel drug must be demonstrated in RCTs in human participants before it can be approved for use in patients. Well-designed RCTs can provide robust evidence of the effects of treatments or interventions. However, they are often of limited duration (several years) and scope owing to costs and feasibility, which can make it more difficult to detect some treatment effects. Even RCTs of sufficient size and duration often require participants to meet strict eligibility criteria, which can exclude individuals with comorbid disease and under-represented minorities. Furthermore, for many research questions, such as to understand the effects of harmful exposures, conducting an RCT is not ethical or feasible10. Therefore, for many research questions, well-designed observational studies can help bridge and complement experimental designs7,8.

Because observational studies are more prone to biases, such as unmeasured confounding and selection bias, than well-designed RCTs11,12, the development and use of rigorous approaches that enhance causal inference are essential13. Nevertheless, different research questions and settings require different approaches and study designs to yield relevant and valid answers. Therefore, evidence should be evaluated on the basis of quality as opposed to purely on the type of study design14. In this Perspective, we present our view on the important role of observational studies in ADRD research. We discuss the challenges of using RCTs to study ADRD and highlight specific ADRD research topics that are suited for observational studies. Finally, we discuss emerging approaches to improve causal inference using observational data and other future research directions.

Observational studies

Observational research is a general term for studies that involve no intervention, manipulation, or experimentation of participants or samples. The term can apply to both basic science and clinical research; here, we focus on observational studies in the context of human clinical and epidemiological research. Observational studies differ from RCTs in two important aspects. First, RCTs involve an intervention, for example, a drug treatment, medical procedure, or psychological or behavioural training. Second, in RCTs, allocation to receive the intervention or not (control) is assigned by random chance; this provides clear temporal order of exposure and outcome and is not as susceptible to confounding by other characteristics. See Table 1 for a more detailed comparison of the advantages and disadvantages of RCTs and observational study designs.

Epidemiological questions can be assessed with a variety of observational study designs15. Many of these study designs draw inference on causes of disease by comparing health factors of interest (often called a risk factor or exposure) between those with and without the disease of interest (often called the outcome). Factors of interest can include social and demographic factors, lifestyle and health behaviours, molecular or biological indicators, and other health conditions. Observational studies can also be used to assess and validate screening and diagnostic tools or to monitor trends in disease prevalence over time. Various epidemiology textbooks describe study designs and their considerations in detail15,16; we summarize common designs in Box 1. In each of these designs, data can be collected from a variety of sources, including clinical examinations, biological measurement questionnaires, electronic medical records, insurance claims data, and/or census information.

Taken into the context of translational science, in which discoveries are translated from basic research and discovery to clinical care or public health measures, observational studies can be used to inform various stages, from basic science to clinical practice17,18. Box 2 summarizes the types of clinical and epidemiological research questions that are suited for observational studies. Below, we further highlight the challenges of performing RCTs in ADRD research and provide specific examples of ADRD research questions that observational epidemiological studies are well suited to address.

Limitations of RCTs

In addition to the general advantages and disadvantages set out in Table 1, RCTs have specific disadvantages in the context of dementia. First, dementia develops over decades and, by the time cognitive impairment is detected, the underlying pathological changes might be too advanced for therapy to be effective3. One reason for the failure of so many clinical trials of disease-modifying interventions in dementia might be that interventions are given too late to significantly slow the disease process and prevent neurodegeneration19. Second, dementia is a heterogeneous syndrome that encompasses a variety of underlying brain pathologies2. Although AD is the most common subtype — comprising 50–70% of dementias2 — most individuals have multiple co-occurring pathologies at autopsy (termed mixed neuropathology), including AD, vascular pathology, Lewy body disease and TDP43 proteinopathy20,21. These pathologies could act additively or interact to increase the risk of dementia22-25 or could contribute to the misdiagnosis of clinical dementia subtypes26. This broad range of overlapping dementia aetiologies highlights the complexity of brain ageing and suggests that there will be no ‘magic bullet’ treatment, as one drug is unlikely to affect more than one mechanism or pathology. This heterogeneity thus poses a problem for conducting RCTs. Indeed, even the most optimistic estimates suggest that antiamyloid treatments have small effects on cognition27, a high risk of adverse effects28 and are of uncertain benefit for patients who have comorbid medical conditions such as vascular disease29. Because animal models of AD tend to mimic a specific and limited number of pathologies, the high prevalence of mixed pathologies in older adults might be part of the reason for failed efficacy of treatments that are promising in animal models.

Applications in AD research

Hypothesis generation

Pathophysiology.

Historically, observational studies have contributed many insights into AD pathophysiology. In the early 1900s, case reports by Alois Alzheimer and others described plaques, tangles and neurodegeneration in the brains of individuals with early-onset dementia, which helped establish AD as a distinct disease30. Observational studies have also identified a correlation of neuropathological, imaging and other biomarkers of AD with dementia symptoms over time3,31,32, genetic variants associated with AD and cognitive decline33,34, and lifestyle, social and clinical risk factors for AD5. Early observational studies on dementia and AD led to the identification of candidate genes such as APP35 and APOE36, neuropathologies associated with dementia31,37, and staging and diagnostic criteria for AD and other dementias38-40. Together, this observational data informed subsequent laboratory studies and the development of the amyloid cascade hypothesis41, which has since dominated the field and driven the development of drug targets such as amyloid-β-directed monoclonal antibody treatments, including the controversially approved aducanumab28. Observational studies also include large-scale genome-wide association studies34,42 that have identified many AD-associated genetic variants with roles in the production of tau and the innate immune response, which are now being investigated as novel drug targets.

Alongside laboratory studies, observational epidemiological studies have an important role in refining and validating scientific knowledge. For example, observational post-mortem studies identified amyloid-β plaques and tau neurofibrillary tangles as characteristic neuropathological features of AD31,38, which were used to develop diagnostic criteria. These observations then motivated the development of in vivo diagnostic testing for AD, including PET imaging43,44, cerebral spinal fluid biomarkers45 and, more recently, blood-based biomarkers for amyloid and tau burden32. Observational biomarker studies examining longitudinal change in AD biomarkers and cognitive decline46,47 are helping to refine the hypothesized pathophysiological cascade of AD3 and contributed to the development of the AT(N) framework for the diagnosis of biological AD48; this work is ongoing. Improving our understanding of biomarker changes in AD and the duration of the preclinical phase of ADRD will be essential for designing better studies in the future.

Risk factor identification.

Early case–control studies found limited risk factors for dementia49-51; however, starting in the 1990s, a shift to large cohort studies with longer follow-up52 as well as access to electronic medical record databases has resulted in the identification of numerous potential risk factors. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses of observational studies suggest that education, hypertension, vascular disease, diabetes, physical activity, a history of smoking, diet, cognitive engagement, depression, sleep quality, and traumatic brain injury influence the risk of cognitive decline and dementia4,5,53,54. Such observational evidence has informed the design of clinical trials testing interventions that aim to slow cognitive decline, for example, vitamin supplementation55, exercise56, cognitive stimulation57, hypertension and cardiovascular risk control58.

Because observational studies suggest that ADRD are likely to be caused by a complex set of lifestyle and health factors4,5,53,54, several health domains might need to be targeted to achieve meaningful dementia reduction. Indeed, multi-domain interventions seem to be particularly promising options for dementia prevention. These approaches combine several interventions, for example, dietary changes, exercise, cognitive training, monitoring of vascular and other health risks, and psychosocial interventions59-61. Examples of clinical trials testing multi-domain interventions include the Prevention of Dementia by Intensive Vascular care (preDIVA) trial, the Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability (FINGER) trial, the worldwide FINGER studies, and the Systematic Multi-domain Alzheimer’s Risk Reduction Trial (SMARRT). The FINGER study is one of few RCTs to have reported slower cognitive decline with intervention60. More results are expected from the recently completed SMARRT and ongoing worldwide FINGER study in the next few years.

Observational studies continue to identify and investigate novel potential risk factors for AD. Study designs well suited to this purpose include established prospective, population-based cohort studies that have been running for years (for example, the Framingham Study62) as well as emerging data biobanks (for example, UK Biobank)63, electronic health record databases and registries64, or data-pooling projects that combine multiple cohorts65. AD risk factors that have emerged over the last decade include napping and sleep disturbances66, peripheral hearing impairment and sensory loss67, neighbourhood effects such as exposure to air pollution68, viral infections such as herpesvirus64, altered gut microbiota69, and mitochondrial dysfunction70.

Taking vision impairments (an emerging risk factor for dementia) as an example, a systematic review published in 2022 identified 110 studies that investigated this risk factor, 48% were cross-sectional, 39% longitudinal and 13% were case–control studies71. Approximately 50% of the studies were performed with participants enroled in population-based studies and 10% used insurance claims data. Although relatively few studies (n = 17) were rated as being of high quality and having limited potential for bias, the majority were moderate and well-designed observational studies that can provide compelling evidence. Another study published in 2022 found that, among individuals with cataracts, cataract extraction was associated with a reduced risk of dementia72. This study combined cohort study data with medical records from an integrated health-care system and used robust analytical methods to account for biases. Furthermore, the researchers used glaucoma surgery, which does not restore vision, as a negative control. Overall, evidence from these studies suggests that bidirectional associations exist between vision impairment and dementia, and that cataract surgery is associated with a reduced risk of dementia. Future observational studies in this area are needed to build on this evidence and could inform whether and which vision interventions can protect against dementia.

Not all associations established in observational studies have held up in clinical trial settings (for example, hormone therapy)73,74 nor have the majority of therapeutics developed in preclinical studies9. In our opinion, strong observational data help provides critical justification for testing interventions and new avenues for mechanistic research. Ideally, observational studies will be informed by preclinical studies and will also lead to new preclinical studies to help build translational evidence.

Research not suitable for RCTs

Some interventions and exposures cannot be investigated in RCTs or with experimental designs for reasons of ethics, practicality or feasibility75. For example, ethical approval for randomization requires equipoise, that is, there is uncertainty over the relative therapeutic merits of each treatment arm10. However, unproven interventions increase the risk for participants compared with standard care and many exposures that would be interesting to study in the context of ADRD risk would cause participants harm. These exposures include harmful environmental factors (air pollution, pesticides, harmful chemicals)68, lifestyle and health conditions (smoking76, obesity77, traumatic brain injury50), and social determinants of health (racism78, discrimination, poverty79).

Beyond ethics, many exposures that are of interest in ADRD are not feasible for randomized intervention. These include exposures that are difficult to change (for example, personality traits), difficult to assign randomly (for example, treatments that are already in widespread use), and long-term exposures and effects75,80. The effect of cancer and cancer treatment on ADRD risk is one such area of research. Although cognitive complaints are common after cancer treatment81, many observational studies suggest that cancer history is associated with a reduced risk of ADRD in the long term82. Therefore, although RCTs for cancer treatments can provide insights into short-term cognitive side effects, the full picture of long-term effects only becomes clear when you look at the observational data.

Larger-scale exposures, such as those at the community level, are also rarely feasible in RCTs. Social determinants of health, defined by the WHO as conditions in the environments where people are born, live, learn, work, play and age, are especially challenging variables for which to design and implement RCTs83. These social determinants of health include education, income or wealth, race and ethnicity, sex, health insurance status, neighbourhood characteristics, and other social influences, all of which might contribute to disparities in ADRD but typically are only altered by policies and legislation84. Observational studies addressing social determinants of health have identified clear inequalities in dementia incidence. Older adults of lower socioeconomic status (SES)85 or those who identify as Black or African American or Hispanic have a higher incidence of ADRD than older adults with higher SES levels and those who identify as white or Asian86. However, SES and race might also contribute to the underdiagnosis or misdiagnosis of dementia; for example, an observational study in Denmark reported that patients with dementia with lower SES were diagnosed at more severe stages and later time points than those with high SES87. This study was performed by linking several population-based Danish registries on dementia care referrals, demographics and other health conditions.

Using observational studies to implement interventions and policy changes can be justified in the following situations: first, when performing RCTs for the exposure of interest is unethical, impossible or infeasible; second, when waiting to intervene would be a detriment to population health; finally, when the observational evidence is consistent and strong across multiple settings and designs80. For example, decades of observational data on social determinants of health have been key for building consensus on possible policy changes and community-wide initiatives to address health disparities84,88. Recommendations from the 2008 WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health final report and current governmental health initiatives include improving access to education, housing, jobs, transportation, green spaces and health care84,89. Likewise, consensus groups have relied on observational data to identify improved education, reduction in vascular risk factors and comorbidities, and promoting healthy lifestyles through late life as targets for dementia prevention5,90.

Life-course associations and timing of exposures

Many exposures are thought to contribute to the risk of ADRD over decades and midlife might be a critical time period for accumulating risk of AD91. This slow accumulation of risk is an added challenge for RCTs as these trials last a few years at most, which might be too short for interventions to have a significant effect on cognitive outcomes. Disease modification therapies might need to be given during the preclinical phases of AD whereas primary prevention efforts might need to occur even earlier such as during midlife92,93 (Fig. 1).

Data from observational studies suggest that cumulative, long-term exposure (as opposed to short-term exposures) to factors such as high blood pressure65, smoking76 and depression94,95 is associated with the highest risk of poor cognition and dementia. Such cumulative effects might also help explain some inequalities in the risk of ADRD. For example, evidence indicates that differences in dementia incidence between Black Americans and white Americans are partly explained by higher blood pressure over the long term in Black Americans65. In contrast, obesity in midlife has been associated with an increased risk of AD but the association is null or inverse for obesity in late life, indicating that midlife could be a critical period during which a high body mass index increases the risk of dementia62. Early-life experiences and health status might also influence other health and lifestyle factors in a dynamic fashion over an individual’s life course96 (Fig. 2). These aspects of life-course epidemiology are difficult to study in the context of clinical trials but are important for understanding AD aetiology and for identifying interventions to reduce disparities. Identifying the timing of exposures and biomarkers of underlying pathology will also help identify windows during which intervention might be most effective, which is essential for designing better RCTs and moving on from recent trial failures.

Under-represented populations

RCTs generally have strict eligibility criteria that select the samples most likely to demonstrate treatment effects. Invasive study procedures, such as PET scans or lumbar punctures, and requirements for a study partner (proxy respondent) are additional factors that can limit recruitment specifically in AD trials97. In addition to eligibility criteria, some individuals might face further barriers to inclusion such as lack of transportation or nearby study sites, language difficulties, and distrust of the medical establishment. Together, these factors might limit the inclusion of important subpopulations in RCTs for ADRD, for example, under-represented and minoritized groups, the oldest-old (age ≥90 years), individuals with lower SES, individuals from rural areas, individuals living alone, or those with medical comorbidities, disability or psychiatric conditions29.

Evidence indicates that, compared with white Americans, Black or African American individuals have a higher incidence of AD86 and are more likely to have mixed pathologies and other comorbidities98 but are less likely to be enroled in RCTs99. Furthermore, adults aged ≥90 years also tend to be excluded from RCTs and have more comorbidities, and those with dementia are more likely to have mixed and non-AD pathologies compared with adults &lt;90 years100. Clarifying whether new treatments are effective and safe in these and other subgroups is essential for clinical practice. The exclusion of specific groups from participating in RCTs limits the generalizability of study findings and could cast doubt upon the efficacy and safety of treatments for real-world use. For example, evidence indicates that individuals with physical frailty and additional comorbidities have higher rates of discontinuation of anticholinergic medication for dementia than the general dementia population; this discontinuation is hypothesized to be the result of increased side effects101. Evidence published in 2021 suggests that 90% of Medicare beneficiaries with AD would have been excluded from the clinical trials for the newly approved aducanumab29. Together, this lack of representation in clinical trials means that drugs effective in RCT samples are likely to have reduced real-world effectiveness. Furthermore, the RCT setting often has more structured intervention strategies and methods to ensure adherence that might not be replicable in real-world settings.

Ideally, RCTs that include samples representative of all patients and conducted in real-world settings (for example, pragmatic trials) would be implemented for all newly approved treatments; however, observational studies evaluating treatment use, effects and adverse events are also useful in informing real-world implementation of drugs or other interventions and identifying disparities. As an example, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are one of the few approved treatments for AD, with RCTs showing modest benefits over a few months of follow-up102. Long-term effects on cognition and mortality were then examined in a cohort study, which compared individuals with dementia treated with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors to untreated individuals with dementia over an average of 5 years of follow-up103. The findings suggested that there were small but long-term benefits associated with the use of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, including slower rates of cognitive decline and reduced mortality. Observational studies are also useful for studying the effects of commonly used drugs (approved for the treatment of other conditions; for example, anticholinergics104 and benzodiazepines105) on the risk of ADRD.

Public health surveillance

Last is the role of observational data for public health surveillance of ADRD and the relevant risk factors. Understanding and monitoring the prevalence and incidence of dementia is crucial for understanding the burden of disease and prioritizing policies and interventions. Estimates of the burden of ADRD are high and large increases are expected over the coming decades, which has helped to highlight ADRD as an issue of national106 and global importance107. Data published in 2020 indicate a decline in dementia incidence over the preceding 25 years108, which gives hope that improvements in education, health behaviours and health care can reduce dementia risk. Beyond highlighting cohort and time trends; observational studies have also identified disparities in dementia incidence such as by race, gender, geography, medical comorbidity status or primary language47,86,107. Another observational study highlighted distributions of risk factors across subpopulations, which might be useful for prioritizing the application of prevention methods to reduce dementia disparities109. Together, such studies inform progress towards ADRD risk reduction and help identify interventions to reduce inequalities.

Causal inference

Observational studies are generally associated with a greater potential for systematic bias, such as confounding and reverse causation, than RCTs110 (Table 1 and Box 3). In some cases, treatments that were associated with beneficial health effects in observational studies have subsequently been found to have harmful effects in RCTs. For example, oestrogen therapy for postmenopausal symptoms was associated with a reduced risk of dementia in many observational studies111; however, in the Women’s Health Initiative clinical trials (1993–2002), combined oestrogen and progestin therapy was associated with an increased risk for dementia112. The trials were stopped early owing to health risks associated with the treatment. Causal inference approaches generally seek to emulate a hypothetical RCT and to use statistical and methodological techniques to ensure that exposure groups are otherwise similar to each other (as randomization does in an RCT; Fig. 3a). One set of causal inference methods — for example, marginal structural models113 and propensity score methods114 — use statistical sample-weighting techniques to account for potential confounding. These approaches attempt to balance comparison groups in terms of confounders and are usually based on a two-step process: first, the probability or ‘propensity’ for the exposure is estimated; second, the weights of that propensity are incorporated into the analysis through matching or covariate adjustment. These models can also be used to estimate factors associated with sample selection or missing data115. Statistical sample-weighting techniques can be useful for identifying and reducing biased findings; for example, one study found that cognitive activities, such as newspaper reading, were associated with a reduced risk of dementia in a traditional model but, when using weights to account for prior levels of cognitive functioning, this association disappeared116.

Natural experiments or quasi-experiments are another type of study design that can help infer causality from observational data. A quasi-experiment involves an intervention; however, the circumstances that led to the intervention were not controlled by the researchers. These experiments require some aspect of intervention assignment to be independent of the characteristics of the participant and the outcome117 (Fig. 3b). For example, many countries implemented mandatory schooling laws in the twentieth century that resulted in the vast majority of students attending school for longer. Comparing dementia risk between individuals who finished school just before the law change and individuals who finished school just after the law change can provide evidence regarding the effect of duration of education on dementia risk. This approach helps to control for confounders such as family SES or childhood health status that would otherwise influence the duration of education. To date, studies using this approach to study the relationship between education and dementia risk have produced mixed findings: no, or small, effects of education on dementia risk were reported in some countries, for example, Sweden118 but larger estimated benefits of education were observed in the USA119 and China120.

Studies examining policies as natural experiments often employ a method called instrumental variable analysis, in which a third variable is used as an instrument or proxy variable for the main exposure of interest121. Under certain assumptions, instrumental variable models can provide valid estimates of causal effects, for example, that the instrument is not associated with unmeasured confounders, that the instrument predicts the exposure of interest, and that the instrument does not directly affect the outcome of interest. An increasingly popular type of instrumental variable analysis is Mendelian randomization, which leverages genes as the instrumental variable (Fig. 3c). Mendelian randomization is based on the premise that an individual’s genes are randomly allocated from parents at birth and this genetic variation is not susceptible to typical confounders122. Genetic variants have been linked to many diseases, biological pathways, health behaviours and even lifestyle factors, facilitating a range of Mendelian randomization studies. For example, a Mendelian randomization study used 77 genetic variants previously associated with sleep duration and found evidence that short and long sleep duration might worsen cognition in older adults123. In another study, higher genetic risk scores for AD (based on 23 genetic variants previously associated with late-onset AD, including APOE) were associated with reduced sleep duration in older adults without dementia124, suggesting a bidirectional relationship between sleep and ADRD. However, other Mendelian randomization studies reported limited effects of education119, obesity125 and anti-hypertensive drugs126 on the risk of AD. Over the last decade, methods have been developed to enable the relaxation of some of the usual assumptions in the setting of Mendelian randomization studies, particularly to allow for pleiotropic effects of genes127. Although the results of such studies should be interpreted with caution, they can still provide novel insights into ADRD aetiology128. Detailed reviews of contemporary and novel Mendelian randomization methods are outside the scope of this Perspective but other sources provide extensive information (see ref.127) and this is an active area for future innovations.

There are other common methodological approaches for quasi-experiments that have been so far underutilized in ADRD research but are promising options for future studies; these include regression discontinuity — an approach that uses treatment qualification thresholds in continuous values (for example, blood pressure) to assign participants to groups. The logic is that individuals just above and below the threshold will receive different treatments but are likely to be otherwise similar, allowing the effect of treatment to be studied129. Interrupted time series uses the regression discontinuity approach but applies it to changes across time such as the implementation of specific laws or events. This approach has also been used to estimate the effects of education on dementia risk by examining completion of primary school surrounding the Great Famine in China120. China’s Great Famine of 1959–1961 resulted in malnutrition, higher mortality rates and social disorder, including school closures. The authors of the study leveraged this event as a natural experiment based on the premise that those born just before 1948 are more likely to complete primary school than those born just after; they found that the group with a higher likelihood of primary school completion (for example, those born within 1944–1948) had better cognition in late life than the group born within 1949–1953. As an interrupted times series model, this study focused on the narrow bands around the 1948 threshold, which reduces the likelihood that results are driven by other cohort differences such as malnutrition120. Difference-in-difference studies examine differences in effects before and after treatment (or intervention) periods in treated versus untreated participants and can evaluate the implementation of health programmes and policies117.

In ideal scenarios, the approaches described in this section can provide strong evidence for causality; however, they also rest on assumptions and can be prone to biases depending on study design11,130. For example, Mendelian randomization studies can be biased if genes have pleiotropic effects on the outcome122,131 and studies that examine trends over time can be biased if there are other concurrent changes with time130. As for any analytical model, the limitations of these approaches should be explored and discussed when interpreting findings.

Conclusions and future directions

Dementia is a devastating condition with few treatment options, many questions remain around ADRD aetiology and risk factors, and novel potential risk factors and mechanisms are continually identified. The examples discussed here demonstrated the continued importance of well-designed observational studies in the ADRD field. We highlight the particular utility of such studies for hypothesis generation, for research infeasible or unethical for RCTs, to estimate life-course associations and timing of exposures, to collect real-world evidence on populations not typically included in RCTs, and for public health surveillance. Therefore, promoting high-quality, valid observational research should be a priority. High-quality research requires clear research questions, well-defined study designs, robust outcome measures, an a priori analytical plan, and transparent identification of potential sources of bias in reporting132.

Given the limited treatment options for dementia and the failure of many clinical trials, we suggest that observational studies investigating a range of potential risk factors are needed to generate novel hypotheses. These future studies should leverage machine learning and big data, including medico-administrative data (for example, insurance claims, electronic health records) and/or high-dimensional biological data (for example, genome-sequencing or high-resolution imaging data)133, to identify novel predictors of ADRD. Indeed, machine learning algorithms have proven useful for evaluating high-dimensional data and have already been used to predict the risk of ADRD based on metabolomic biomarkers134, neuroimaging data135, and social and health risk-factor data136. In the future, we expect that such machine-learning approaches will provide novel insights into ADRD pathophysiology and inform the development of effective risk-stratification and diagnostic strategies.

Although a range of life-course risk factors for ADRD has been identified, many remain poorly understood. This gap in our knowledge applies to more recently identified factors, such as sleep disturbances, sensory loss, air pollution, microbiome and mitochondrial function, as well as the more established but still debated risk factors such as depression, body mass index, and social and cognitive engagement. Therefore, further well-designed and innovative observational research is required to establish whether these and other potential risk factors cause ADRD. Evidence triangulation is the idea that consistent findings across several study approaches can enhance causal inference, particularly when studies are based on several different sets of underlying assumptions13. This concept highlights the importance and value of replicating research findings across different observational study designs, including both traditional observational studies and innovative quasi-experimental designs that leverage observational data. The proliferation of blood-based and PET imaging biomarkers for ADRD provides new opportunities to understand how risk factors relate to biological processes in ADRD and to tease apart causative factors from early markers of disease.

Another urgent area for future observational research involves the health inequalities that affect ADRD risk. For example, understanding how and which aspects of structural racism, discrimination, social factors and built environments affect the development of ADRD is essential. Such information is needed to identify feasible approaches to reduce inequalities in ADRD incidence and dementia care.

In conclusion, the strongest evidence for causes of ADRD comes from using a variety of study designs and complementing RCTs and laboratory science with observational epidemiological and clinical research. Observational epidemiological research is a key building block to obtain evidence for potential causes of ADRD that might lead to new drug targets and preventive strategies to reduce the burden of dementia in diverse ageing populations.

Competing interests

The research of W.D.B. and K.Y. is supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute on Aging (NIA) grants NIA K01AG062722 (W.D.B) and R35AG071916 (K.Y.). The authors declare no other competing interests.

Glossary

Amyloid cascade hypothesis The hypothesis that amyloid-β is the main pathological agent that causes Alzheimer disease.

Big data Large-scale data comprising many observations and/or many traits.

Causal inference Inferring the independent effect of one factor on an outcome, typically from data of observations.

Pleiotropic effects When one gene influences two or more phenotypic traits.

Pragmatic trials Clinical trials developed after drug approval to test the effectiveness of a drug in a real-world setting.

Real-world data Observational data that represent real-world settings, for example, health-care records in a large health system.

Fig. 1 ∣ Natural history of Alzheimer disease and related dementias and timing of interventions.

Alzheimer disease and related dementias develop over decades and are characterized by long preclinical and prodromal stages of high neuropathological burden but limited or subtle cognitive decline. Interventions could be useful for disease prevention, modification, and mitigation or symptom reduction; however, randomized controlled trials are typically short and might not occur at the optimal points in the disease process. For example, many trials of disease modification strategies could have produced negative results because participants already had a high level of pathology and brain atrophy.

Fig. 2 ∣ Life-course risk factors for ADRD.

A life-course framework conceptualizes exposures for health as occurring across the lifespan in a dynamic and interconnected fashion. Experiences and conditions in early life might influence health and lifestyle factors in later life stages. Several key risk factors for Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD) relevant to early life, midlife and late life are depicted; this is not a complete list of potential life-course risk factors and, for some risk factors, it is unknown at what life stages they have the biggest effect. The same risk factors might also accumulate or interact across time to influence the development of dementia. Research into the effects of life-course exposures on ADRD risk is best performed via observational studies; such work can also help to prioritize specific windows in which intervention might be effective.

Fig. 3 ∣ Causal models for randomized and quasi-experimental studies.

Observational evidence suggests high blood pressure (BP) is a risk factor for dementia and that BP treatment might reduce the risk of dementia (part a). A key strength of a randomized clinical trial (RCT) is that allocation to treatment is random and is thus independent of potential confounders (common causes) of high blood pressure and dementia. As such, if lowering BP is found to reduce dementia risk in an RCT, there are few plausible alternative explanations for the finding. In theory, quasi-experimental designs can approximate similar inferences as RCTs if there is a third factor that influences BP but is not affected by patient-level confounders. For example, a change in treatment guidelines or policies for BP management (part b) or genetic risk for high or low BP (part c).

Table 1 ∣ Strengths and limitations of observational studies and randomized controlled trials

	Observational studies	Randomized controlled trials	
Strengths	More feasible for evaluating multiple exposures and/or outcomes; more feasible for evaluating the effects of long-term exposures; can often be conducted using previously collected data (electronic health records); less restrictive eligibility criteria might enhance representativeness	Suited for evaluating treatment effects; random assignment to treatment protects against selection bias at recruitment and unmeasured confounding, and establishes temporal order	
Limitations	Susceptible to confounding by other characteristics (factors that affect both exposure and outcome) and selection bias; establishing a clear temporal ordering of exposure and outcome is not always possible	Can be high-cost and logistically intensive; limited duration of intervention and follow-up; experimentation might not be suitable for research questions due to ethics or feasibility; design assumptions that allow a causal interpretation of the results of a randomized controlled trial do hold for post hoc subgroup analyses	

Box 1 Summary of common epidemiological study designs

Observational studies

Studies based on data that involve no intervention, manipulation, or experimentation of participants or samples

Case reports and case series: description of observations on one patient or multiple patients (often with unusual or rare findings)

Cross-sectional studies: comparison between an exposure and disease at one time-point

Case–control: selection of cases based on disease and a sample of those without the disease (controls) followed by a comparison of exposures

Cohort studies: selection of sample based on exposure or a population of interest, which is then followed for disease outcomes

Ecological studies: comparison of aggregate information on exposure and disease in a population (or across populations)

Interventional studies

Studies based on data that involves an intervention, manipulation, or experimentation of participants or samples

Randomized controlled trials: assignment of participants to the intervention group (or treatment) is random

Non-randomized interventions: allocation of intervention is not randomly assigned

Box 2 Questions suited for observational studies

Developing interventions

Hypothesis generation for novel risk factors or treatments

Validation of in vitro and animal research

Evaluating and improving diagnosis and biomarkers

Replication of findings across study designs and populations

Identification of exposure windows and intervention targets

Studying exposures that are not ethical or feasible for intervention

Studying real-world effects

Effectiveness of an intervention or treatment in typical use setting

Effectiveness of interventions in the general population and in subgroups that are not well represented in clinical trials

Public health surveillance

Evaluating trends in risk factors, treatments and dementia incidence by person, place and time

Box 3 Types of systematic bias common in clinical research

Confounding

A confounder is a factor that affects both the risk factor (that is, exposure) and the disease (that is, outcome). Confounders distort the observed association of a risk factor and outcome unless properly accounted for in the study design (such as through matching) or analysis stage (such as through inclusion as a covariate in regression models). Common confounders for questions relevant to Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD) include age, education, income, health behaviours and other health conditions.

Reverse causation and confounding by prior outcomes

When an outcome affects the exposure, instead of the exposure affecting the outcome. Establishing the temporal order of late-life risk factors and ADRD is a challenge. This might explain associations in cross-sectional studies and in case–control studies that measure exposures after cases developed dementia. In cohort studies, incipient or preclinical ADRD might act as a confounder by affecting an individual’s behaviour and cognition years before a diagnosis of dementia.

Selection bias

A bias that generally arises in selecting a study or analytical sample, such that participants in the analytical sample are not representative of the underlying population. This can happen due to study sampling at recruitment or through attrition in follow-up. In order for bias to occur, selection must be influenced by the exposure and outcome or by a third factor that is also associated with the outcome (this is more generally called collider-stratification bias). An example is that studies based on recruitment in memory centres might lead to an overrepresentation of individuals with a family history of Alzheimer disease and memory loss compared with the general population — this would lead to an overestimation of the association of family history for Alzheimer disease and memory loss.

Information bias or measurement error

Bias that generally arises through inaccurate measurement of exposures, outcomes or confounders. Relevant to both observational and randomized controlled trials; however, many exposures not conducive to intervention are also ones that are difficult to measure (for example, life-course factors, social determinants and underlying biological conditions). Blinding can be an effective solution to reduce differential information bias.


References

1. Alzheimer’s Disease International, Guerchet M , Prince M &amp; Prina M Numbers of People with Dementia Worldwide: An Update to the Estimates in the World Alzheimer Report 2015 (Alzheimer’s Disease International, 2020).
2. Alzheimer’s Association. 2020 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimers Dement. 16 , 391–460 (2020).
3. Jack CR Jr Tracking pathophysiological processes in Alzheimer’s disease: an updated hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers. Lancet Neurol. 12 , 207–216 (2013).23332364
4. Barnes DE &amp; Yaffe K The projected effect of risk factor reduction on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. Lancet Neurol. 10 , 819–828 (2011).21775213
5. Livingston G Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet 396 , 413–446 (2020).32738937
6. Long JM &amp; Holtzman DM Alzheimer disease: an update on pathobiology and treatment strategies. Cell 179 , 312–339 (2019).31564456
7. Vandenbroucke JP Observational research, randomised trials, and two views of medical science. PLoS Med. 5 , e67 (2008).18336067
8. Frieden TR Evidence for health decision making-Beyond randomized, controlled trials. N. Engl. J. Med 377 , 465–475 (2017).28767357
9. Stoiljkovic M , Horvath TL &amp; Hajós M Therapy for Alzheimer’s disease: missing targets and functional markers? Ageing Res. Rev 68 , 101318 (2021).33711510
10. Freedman B Equipoise and the ethics of clinical research. N. Engl. J. Med 317 , 141–145 (1987).3600702
11. Fewell Z , Davey Smith G &amp; Sterne JAC The impact of residual and unmeasured confounding in epidemiologic studies: a simulation study. Am. J. Epidemiol 166 , 646–655 (2007).17615092
12. Hernán MA &amp; Robins JM Estimating causal effects from epidemiological data. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 60 , 578–586 (2006).16790829
13. Lawlor DA , Tilling K &amp; Davey Smith G Triangulation in aetiological epidemiology. Int. J. Epidemiol 45 , 1866–1886 (2016).28108528
14. Balshem H GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of evidence. J. Clin. Epidemiol 64 , 401–406 (2011).21208779
15. Lash TL Modern Epidemiology (Wolters Kluwer, 2021).
16. Koepsell TD Epidemiologic Methods: Studying the Occurrence of Illness (Oxford University Press, 2014).
17. Dougherty D &amp; Conway PH The “3T’s” road map to transform US health care: the “How” of high-quality care. JAMA 299 , 2319–2321 (2008).18492974
18. Trochim W , Kane C , Graham MJ &amp; Pincus HA Evaluating translational research: a process marker model. Clin. Transl. Sci 4 , 153–162 (2011).21707944
19. Sperling RA , Jack CR &amp; Aisen PS Testing the right target and right drug at the right stage. Sci. Transl. Med 3 , 111cm33 (2011).
20. Schneider JA , Arvanitakis Z , Bang W &amp; Bennett DA Mixed brain pathologies account for most dementia cases in community-dwelling older persons. Neurology 69 , 2197–2204 (2007).17568013
21. Nelson PT ‘New Old Pathologies’: AD, PART, and cerebral age-related TDP-43 with sclerosis (CARTS). J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 75 , 482–498 (2016).27209644
22. McAleese KE Concomitant neurodegenerative pathologies contribute to the transition from mild cognitive impairment to dementia. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 17 , 1121–1133 (2021).
23. Vemuri P Vascular and amyloid pathologies are independent predictors of cognitive decline in normal elderly. Brain 138 , 761–771 (2015).25595145
24. White LR Neuropathologic comorbidity and cognitive impairment in the Nun and Honolulu-Asia Aging Studies. Neurology 86 , 1000–1008 (2016).26888993
25. Brenowitz WD Mixed neuropathologies and estimated rates of clinical progression in a large autopsy sample. Alzheimers Dement. 13 , 654–662 (2017).27870939
26. Beach TG , Monsell SE , Phillips LE &amp; Kukull W Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease at National Institute on Aging Alzheimer Disease Centers, 2005–2010. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 71 , 266–273 (2012).22437338
27. Ackley SF Effect of reductions in amyloid levels on cognitive change in randomized trials: instrumental variable meta-analysis. BMJ 372 , n156 (2021).33632704
28. Alexander GC Revisiting FDA approval of aducanumab. N. Engl. J. Med 385 , 769–771 (2021).34320282
29. Anderson TS , Ayanian JZ , Souza J &amp; Landon BE Representativeness of participants eligible to be enrolled in Clinical Trials of Aducanumab for Alzheimer disease compared with Medicare beneficiaries with Alzheimer Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment. JAMA 326 , 1627–1629 (2021).34499725
30. Berchtold NC &amp; Cotman CW Evolution in the conceptualization of dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: Greco-Roman period to the 1960s. Neurobiol. Aging 19 , 173–189 (1998).9661992
31. Braak H &amp; Braak E Frequency of stages of Alzheimer-related lesions in different age categories. Neurobiol. Aging 18 , 351–357 (1997).9330961
32. Mielke MM Plasma phospho-tau181 increases with Alzheimer’s disease clinical severity and is associated with tau- and amyloid-positron emission tomography. Alzheimers Dement. 14 , 989–997 (2018).29626426
33. Lambert JC Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new susceptibility loci for Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Genet 45 , 1452–1458 (2013).24162737
34. Kunkle BW Genetic meta-analysis of diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease identifies new risk loci and implicates Aβ, tau, immunity and lipid processing. Nat. Genet 51 , 414–430 (2019).30820047
35. Chartier-Harlin MC Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease caused by mutations at codon 717 of the beta-amyloid precursor protein gene. Nature 353 , 844–846 (1991).1944558
36. Corder EH Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type 4 allele and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in late onset families. Science 261 , 921–923 (1993).8346443
37. Hamilton RL Lewy bodies in Alzheimer’s disease: a neuropathological review of 145 cases using alpha-synuclein immunohistochemistry. Brain Pathol. 10 , 378–384 (2000).10885656
38. Mirra SS The consortium to establish a registry for Alzheimer’s disease (CERAD). Part II. Standardization of the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 41 , 479–486 (1991).2011243
39. Newell KL , Hyman BT , Growdon JH &amp; Hedley-Whyte ET Application of the National Institute on Aging (NIA)-Reagan Institute criteria for the neuropathological diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. J. Neuropathol 58 , 1147–1155 (1999).
40. McKeith IG Diagnosis and management of dementia with Lewy bodies: third report of the DLB consortium. Neurology 65 , 1863–1872 (2005).16237129
41. Hardy JA &amp; Higgins GA Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 256 , 184–185 (1992).1566067
42. Bellenguez C New insights into the genetic etiology of Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. Nat. Genet 54 , 412–436 (2022).35379992
43. Pascoal TA In vivo quantification of neurofibrillary tangles with [18F]MK-6240. Alzheimers Res. Ther 10 , 74 (2018).30064520
44. Clark CM Use of florbetapir-PET for imaging β-amyloid pathology. JAMA 305 , 275–283 (2011).21245183
45. Shaw LM Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker signature in Alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative subjects. Ann. Neurol 65 , 403–413 (2009).19296504
46. McDade E Longitudinal cognitive and biomarker changes in dominantly inherited Alzheimer disease. Neurology 91 , e1295–e1306 (2018).30217935
47. Vermunt L Duration of preclinical, prodromal, and dementia stages of Alzheimer’s disease in relation to age, sex, and APOE genotype. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 15 , 888–898 (2019).
48. Jack CR NIA-AA research framework: toward a biological definition of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 14 , 535–562 (2018).
49. Amaducci LA Risk factors for clinically diagnosed Alzheimer’s disease: a case-control study of an Italian population. Neurology 36 , 922–931 (1986).3714054
50. Molgaard CA Epidemiology of head trauma and neurocognitive impairment in a multi-ethnic population. Neuroepidemiology 9 , 233–242 (1990).2087247
51. Fratiglioni L , Ahlbom A , Viitanen M &amp; Winblad B Risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based, case-control study. Ann. Neurol 33 , 258–266 (1993).8498809
52. Stern Y Influence of education and occupation on the incidence of Alzheimer’s disease. JAMA 271 , 1004–1010 (1994).8139057
53. Yu J-T Evidence-based prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of 243 observational prospective studies and 153 randomised controlled trials. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 91 , 1201–1209 (2020).32690803
54. Baumgart M Summary of the evidence on modifiable risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia: a population-based perspective. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 11 , 718–726 (2015).
55. Markun S Effects of vitamin B12 supplementation on cognitive function, depressive symptoms, and fatigue: a systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression. Nutrients 13 , 923 (2021).33809274
56. de Souto Barreto P , Demougeot L , Vellas B &amp; Rolland Y Exercise training for preventing dementia, mild cognitive impairment, and clinically meaningful cognitive decline: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 73 , 1504–1511 (2018).29216339
57. Woods B , Aguirre E , Spector AE &amp; Orrell M Cognitive stimulation to improve cognitive functioning in people with dementia. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev 2 , CD005562 (2012).
58. SPRINT MIND Investigators for the SPRINT Research Group Effect of intensive vs standard blood pressure control on probable dementia: a randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 321 , 553–561 (2019).30688979
59. Moll van Charante EP Effectiveness of a 6-year multidomain vascular care intervention to prevent dementia (preDIVA): a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 388 , 797–805 (2016).27474376
60. Rosenberg A Multidomain lifestyle intervention benefits a large elderly population at risk for cognitive decline and dementia regardless of baseline characteristics: the FINGER trial. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 14 , 263–270 (2018).
61. Yaffe K Systematic multi-domain Alzheimer’s risk reduction trial (SMARRT): study protocol. J. Alzheimers Dis 70 , S207–S220 (2019).30475764
62. Li J Mid- to Late- life body mass index and dementia risk: 38 years of follow-up of the Framingham study. Am. J. Epidemiol 190 , 2503–2510 (2021).
63. Sudlow C UK biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Med. 12 , e1001779 (2015).25826379
64. Lopatko Lindman K Herpesvirus infections, antiviral treatment, and the risk of dementia-a registry-based cohort study in Sweden. Alzheimers Dement. 7 , e12119 (2021).
65. Levine DA Association between blood pressure and later-life cognition among black and white individuals. JAMA Neurol. 77 , 810–819 (2020).32282019
66. Leng Y , Musiek ES , Hu K , Cappuccio FP &amp; Yaffe K Association between circadian rhythms and neurodegenerative diseases. Lancet Neurol. 18 , 307–318 (2019).30784558
67. Deal JA Hearing impairment and incident dementia and cognitive decline in older adults: the health ABC study. J. Gerontol. A. Biol. Sci. Med. Sci 72 , 703–709 (2017).27071780
68. Power MC , Adar SD , Yanosky JD &amp; Weuve J Exposure to air pollution as a potential contributor to cognitive function, cognitive decline, brain imaging, and dementia: a systematic review of epidemiologic research. Neurotoxicology 56 , 235–253 (2016).27328897
69. Saji N Analysis of the relationship between the gut microbiome and dementia: a cross-sectional study conducted in Japan. Sci. Rep 9 , 1008 (2019).30700769
70. Tranah GJ Mitochondrial DNA sequence variation associated with dementia and cognitive function in the elderly. J. Alzheimers Dis 32 , 357–372 (2012).22785396
71. Nagarajan N Vision impairment and cognitive decline among older adults: a systematic review. BMJ Open. 12 , e047929 (2022).
72. Lee CS Association Between cataract extraction and development of dementia. JAMA Intern. Med 182 , 134–141 (2022).34870676
73. Carlson MC Hormone replacement therapy and reduced cognitive decline in older women: the Cache County Study. Neurology 57 , 2210–2216 (2001).11756599
74. Espeland MA Long-term effects on cognitive function of postmenopausal hormone therapy prescribed to women aged 50 to 55 years. JAMA Intern. Med 173 , 1429–1436 (2013).23797469
75. Black N Why we need observational studies to evaluate the effectiveness of health care. BMJ 312 , 1215–1218 (1996).8634569
76. Bahorik AL Early to midlife smoking trajectories and cognitive function in middle-aged US adults: the CARDIA study. J. Gen. Intern. Med 37 , 1023–1030 (2022).33501538
77. Emmerzaal TL , Kiliaan AJ &amp; Gustafson DR 2003-2013: a decade of body mass index, Alzheimer’s disease, and dementia. J. Alzheimers Dis 43 , 739–755 (2015).25147111
78. Coogan P Experiences of racism and subjective cognitive function in African American women. Alzheimers Dement. 12 , e12067 (2020).
79. Grasset L Relation between 20-year income volatility and brain health in midlife: the CARDIA study. Neurology 93 , e1890–e1899 (2019).31578298
80. Dacks PA Dementia prevention: optimizing the use of observational data for personal, clinical, and public health decision-making. J. Prev. Alzheimers Dis 1 , 117–123 (2014).26146610
81. Lange M Cognitive complaints in cancer survivors and expectations for support: results from a web-based survey. Cancer Med. 8 , 2654–2663 (2019).30884207
82. Ospina-Romero M Association between Alzheimer disease and cancer with evaluation of study biases: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Netw. Open 3 , e2025515 (2020).33185677
83. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Social Determinants of Health. Healthy People 2030 https://health.gov/healthypeople/objectives-and-data/social-determinants-health (2022).
84. Marmot M , Friel S , Bell R , Houweling TA &amp; Taylor S Closing the gap in a generation: health equity through action on the social determinants of health. Lancet 372 , 1661–1669 (2008).18994664
85. Cadar D Individual and area-based socioeconomic factors associated with dementia incidence in England. JAMA Psychiatry 75 , 723–732 (2018).29799983
86. Mayeda ER , Glymour MM , Quesenberry CP &amp; Whitmer RA Inequalities in dementia incidence between six racial and ethnic groups over 14 years. Alzheimers Dement. 12 , 216–224 (2016).26874595
87. Petersen JD Association of socioeconomic status with dementia diagnosis among older adults in Denmark. JAMA Netw. Open 4 , e2110432 (2021).34003271
88. Marmot MG , Shipley MJ &amp; Rose G Inequalities in death–specific explanations of a general pattern? Lancet 1 , 1003–1006 (1984).6143919
89. Dow WH , Schoeni RF , Adler NE &amp; Stewart J Evaluating the evidence base: Policies and interventions to address socioeconomic status gradients in health. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci 1186 , 240–251 (2010).20201876
90. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Preventing Cognitive Decline and Dementia: a Way Forward (The National Academies Press, 2017).
91. Ritchie K , Ritchie CW , Yaffe K , Skoog I &amp; Scarmeas N Is late-onset Alzheimer’s disease really a disease of midlife? Alzheimers Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv 1 , 122–130 (2015).
92. Sperling RA Toward defining the preclinical stages of Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations from the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 7 , 280–292 (2011).21514248
93. Sperling R , Mormino E &amp; Johnson K The evolution of preclinical Alzheimer’s disease: implications for prevention trials. Neuron 84 , 608–622 (2014).25442939
94. Lee ATC Risk of incident dementia varies with different onset and courses of depression. J. Affect. Disord 282 , 915–920 (2021).33601735
95. Dotson VM , Beydoun MA &amp; Zonderman AB Recurrent depressive symptoms and the incidence of dementia and mild cognitive impairment. Neurology 75 , 27–34 (2010).20603482
96. Nicolau B , Thomson WM , Steele JG &amp; Allison PJ Life-course epidemiology: concepts and theoretical models and its relevance to chronic oral conditions. Community Dent. Oral. Epidemiol 35 , 241–249 (2007).17615010
97. Watson JL , Ryan L , Silverberg N , Cahan V &amp; Bernard MA Obstacles and opportunities In Alzheimer’s clinical trial recruitment. Health Aff. 33 , 574–579 (2014).
98. Barnes LL Mixed pathology is more likely in black than white decedents with Alzheimer dementia. Neurology 85 , 528–534 (2015).26180136
99. Manly JJ &amp; Glymour MM What the aducanumab approval reveals about Alzheimer disease research. JAMA Neurol. 78 , 1305–1306 (2021).34605885
100. Kawas CH Multiple pathologies are common and related to dementia in the oldest-old: the 90+ study. Neurology 85 , 535–542 (2015).26180144
101. Gill SS Representation of patients with dementia in clinical trials of donepezil. Can. J. Clin. Pharmacol. J. Can. Pharmacol. Clin 11 , e274–e285 (2004).
102. Dou K-X Comparative safety and effectiveness of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine for Alzheimer’s disease: a network meta-analysis of 41 randomized controlled trials. Alzheimers Res. Ther 10 , 126 (2018).30591071
103. Xu H Long-term effects of cholinesterase inhibitors on cognitive decline and mortality. Neurology 96 , e2220–e2230 (2021).33741639
104. Richardson K Anticholinergic drugs and risk of dementia: case-control study. BMJ 361 , k1315 (2018).29695481
105. Gray SL Benzodiazepine use and risk of incident dementia or cognitive decline: prospective population based study. BMJ 352 , i90 (2016).26837813
106. Brookmeyer R , Abdalla N , Kawas CH &amp; Corrada MM Forecasting the prevalence of pre-clinical and clinical Alzheimer’s disease in the United States. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 14 , 121–129 (2018).
107. GBD 2016 Dementia Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016. Lancet Neurol. 18 , 88–106 (2019).30497964
108. Wolters FJ Twenty-seven-year time trends in dementia incidence in Europe and the United States: the Alzheimer Cohorts Consortium. Neurology 95 , e519–e531 (2020).32611641
109. Mukadam N , Sommerlad A , Huntley J &amp; Livingston G Population attributable fractions for risk factors for dementia in low-income and middle-income countries: an analysis using cross-sectional survey data. Lancet Glob. Health 7 , e596–e603 (2019).31000129
110. Schünemann HJ GRADE guidelines: 18. How ROBINS-I and other tools to assess risk of bias in nonrandomized studies should be used to rate the certainty of a body of evidence. J. Clin. Epidemiol 111 , 105–114 (2019).29432858
111. Yaffe K , Sawaya G , Lieberburg I &amp; Grady D Estrogen therapy in postmenopausal women: effects on cognitive function and dementia. JAMA 279 , 688–695 (1998).9496988
112. Shumaker SA Estrogen plus progestin and the incidence of dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 289 , 2651–2662 (2003).12771112
113. Robins JM , Hernán MA &amp; Brumback B Marginal structural models and causal inference in epidemiology. Epidemiology 11 , 550–560 (2000).10955408
114. Lunceford JK &amp; Davidian M Stratification and weighting via the propensity score in estimation of causal treatment effects: a comparative study. Stat. Med 23 , 2937–2960 (2004).15351954
115. Little RJA &amp; Rubin DB Statistical Analysis with Missing Data (Wiley, 1987).
116. Williams BD , Pendleton N &amp; Chandola T Cognitively stimulating activities and risk of probable dementia or cognitive impairment in the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. SSM Popul. Health 12 , 100656 (2020).32984495
117. Shadish WR , Cook TD &amp; Campbell DT Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Designs for Generalized Causal Inference (Cengage Learning, 2001).
118. Seblova D Does prolonged education causally affect dementia risk when adult socioeconomic status is not altered? A Swedish natural experiment in 1.3 million individuals. Am. J. Epidemiol 190 , 817–826 (2021).33226079
119. Nguyen TT Instrumental variable approaches to identifying the causal effect of educational attainment on dementia risk. Ann. Epidemiol 26 , 71–76.e3 (2016).26633592
120. Huang W &amp; Zhou Y Effects of education on cognition at older ages: evidence from China’s Great Famine. Soc. Sci. Med 98 , 54–62 (2013).24331882
121. Angrist JD &amp; Krueger AB Instrumental variables and the search for identification: from supply and demand to natural experiments. J. Econ. Perspect 15 , 69–85 (2001).
122. Lawlor DA , Harbord RM , Sterne JAC , Timpson N &amp; Smith GD Mendelian randomization: using genes as instruments for making causal inferences in epidemiology. Stat. Med 27 , 1133–1163 (2008).17886233
123. Henry A The relationship between sleep duration, cognition and dementia: a Mendelian randomization study. Int. J. Epidemiol 48 , 849–860 (2019).31062029
124. Leng Y , Ackley SF , Glymour MM , Yaffe K &amp; Brenowitz WD Genetic risk of Alzheimer’s disease and sleep duration in non-demented elders. Ann. Neurol 89 , 177–181 (2021).32951248
125. Mukherjee S Genetically predicted body mass index and Alzheimer’s disease related phenotypes in three large samples: Mendelian randomization analyses. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 11 , 1439–1451 (2015).
126. Walker VM , Kehoe PG , Martin RM &amp; Davies NM Repurposing antihypertensive drugs for the prevention of Alzheimer’s disease: a Mendelian randomization study. Int. J. Epidemiol 49 , 1132–1140 (2019).
127. Sanderson E Mendelian randomization. Nat. Rev. Methods Prim 2 , 6 (2022).
128. Burgess S , Butterworth AS &amp; Thompson JR Beyond Mendelian randomization: how to interpret evidence of shared genetic predictors. J. Clin. Epidemiol 69 , 208–216 (2016).26291580
129. Bor J , Moscoe E , Mutevedzi P , Newell M-L &amp; Bärnighausen T Regression discontinuity designs in epidemiology. Epidemiology 25 , 729–737 (2014).25061922
130. Bärnighausen T Quasi-experimental study designs series-paper 7: assessing the assumptions. J. Clin. Epidemiol 89 , 53–66 (2017).28365306
131. Thompson JR Mendelian randomization incorporating uncertainty about pleiotropy. Stat. Med 39 , 4627–4645 (2017).
132. Weuve J Guidelines for reporting methodological challenges and evaluating potential bias in dementia research. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 11 , 1098–1109 (2015).
133. Bi Q , Goodman KE , Kaminsky J &amp; Lessler J What is machine learning? A primer for the epidemiologist. Am. J. Epidemiol 188 , 2222–2239 (2019).31509183
134. Stamate D A metabolite-based machine learning approach to diagnose Alzheimer-type dementia in blood: results from the European medical information framework for Alzheimer disease biomarker discovery cohort. Alzheimers Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv 5 , 933–938 (2019).
135. Habes M The brain chart of aging: Machine-learning analytics reveals links between brain aging, white matter disease, amyloid burden, and cognition in the iSTAGING consortium of 10,216 harmonized MR scans. Alzheimers Dement. J. Alzheimers Assoc 17 , 89–102 (2021).
136. Casanova R Investigating predictors of preserved cognitive function in older women using machine learning: women’s health initiative memory study. J. Alzheimers Dis 84 , 1267–1278 (2021).34633318
