LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100962781
22270
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nat Rev Neurosci
Nature reviews. Neuroscience
1471-003X
1471-0048

35505254
9282724
10.1038/s41583-022-00588-3
NIHMS1822281
Article
Macroautophagy in CNS health and disease
Griffey Christopher J. http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3781-8087
1
Yamamoto Ai 2✉
1 Doctoral Program in Neurobiology and Behaviour, Medical Scientist Training Program, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
2 Departments of Neurology, and Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
Author contributions

The authors both contributed to all aspects of the article.

✉ ai.yamamoto@columbia.edu
10 7 2022
7 2022
03 5 2022
14 7 2022
23 7 411427
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Macroautophagy is an evolutionarily conserved process that delivers diverse cellular contents to lysosomes for degradation. As our understanding of this pathway grows, so does our appreciation for its importance in disorders of the CNS. Once implicated primarily in neurodegenerative events owing to acute injury and ageing, macroautophagy is now also linked to disorders of neurodevelopment, indicating that it is essential for both the formation and maintenance of a healthy CNS. In parallel to understanding the significance of macroautophagy across contexts, we have gained a greater mechanistic insight into its physiological regulation and the breadth of cargoes it can degrade. Macroautophagy is a broadly used homeostatic process, giving rise to questions surrounding how defects in this single pathway could cause diseases with distinct clinical and pathological signatures. To address this complexity, we herein review macroautophagy in the mammalian CNS by examining three key features of the process and its relationship to disease: how it functions at a basal level in the discrete cell types of the brain and spinal cord; which cargoes are being degraded in physiological and pathological settings; and how the different stages of the macroautophagy pathway intersect with diseases of neurodevelopment and adult-onset neurodegeneration.


pmcCells of the mammalian brain and spinal cord rely on robust catabolism to maintain homeostasis and carry out their highly specialized functions. With significant metabolic and catabolic demands, these cells must efficiently recycle macromolecules (for example, proteins and lipids) and organelles (for example, mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum (ER))1. These needs can be met by macroautophagy, a versatile and conserved pathway in which substrates are captured in double-membrane vesicles and trafficked to lysosomes for degradation. Neurons of the PNS and the CNS were among the first cell types in which macroautophagy was examined2,3. Whereas acute and prolonged starvation did not trigger the CNS to capture cytosol into double-membrane vesicles, which would later be named autophagosomes by De Duve4, profound stressors, such as nerve crush and axon transection, evoked a marked macroautophagic response. Since then, work first in primary neurons and then in vivo has shown that a broad range of stressors, including hypoxia and ER stress5–7, can increase autophagosome biogenesis and subsequent degradation, emphasizing the long-held identity of macroautophagy as a stress response pathway in neurons.

Catabolism

The breakdown of complex molecules and structures into smaller units.

A significant shift in how macroautophagy is viewed in the CNS arrived with seminal papers from the groups of Mizushima and Tanaka, which, building upon the work of Ohsumi’s group8,9 and others, demonstrated that broad disruption of autophagy-related (ATG) proteins involved in autophagosome formation (FIG. 1) in neural and glial precursors leads to neurodegeneration, motor dysfunction and death10,11. These studies not only cemented macroautophagy dysfunction as convergent with degenerative events and potentially neurodegenerative disease but also indicated that macroautophagy has a basal role in maintaining CNS health. An often-overlooked aspect of these studies is that, although neurodegeneration is a consequence of macroautophagy disruption, the degeneration is not widespread. Instead, preferential vulnerability of neurons to macroautophagy loss — particularly Purkinje cells and cerebral cortical and hippocampal pyramidal neurons — points to neuronal subtype-specific reliance on catabolism to maintain cellular health12. Experiments using Cre-based approaches in mice added resolution to this idea (TABLE 1); for example, deletion of the macroautophagy-initiating gene Atg7 in Purkinje cells leads to neurodegeneration at 2 months13, while its deletion in dopaminergic neurons results in only modest neurodegeneration even after 1.5 years14–17. The reason for these differences is still unknown.

With advances in genetics and cell biology, investigation of the molecules involved in macroautophagy and the relevance to human disease has continued to grow18. This research effort has revealed substantial involvement of macroautophagy in CNS development, cellular homeostasis and diseases of both development and adult-onset neurodegeneration. In this Review, we provide an overview of macroautophagy in the mammalian CNS and discuss how this process is modulated in health and disease, including an emerging focus on selective macroautophagic pathways. We also explore how macroautophagy may be differentially adapted by the discrete and highly specialized cell types of the CNS, and the questions that are still outstanding to allow full comprehension of how its ‘dysfunction’ may or may not contribute to disease.

Molecular overview of macroautophagy

Macroautophagy is one of the three pathways described in eukaryotic cells that are collectively known as autophagy (‘self-eating’)19. Each pathway is distinguished by how cargoes are delivered to the lysosomal lumen. In macroautophagy, cargo is sequestered in a nascent double-membrane autophagosome, which matures and fuses with the lysosome for degradation (FIG. 1). In microautophagy, materials are directly engulfed by the lysosome by invaginations or protrusions of the lysosomal membrane20. In chaperone-mediated autophagy, proteins are trafficked to the lysosome by the chaperone heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein (HSC70) and co-chaperone proteins, then internalized via the lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2A (LAMP2A) receptor on the lysosomal membrane21. Although microautophagy has not been extensively examined in mammalian cells, chaperone-mediated autophagy dysregulation in neurodegenerative disease22 and how to harness its therapeutic potential remain active areas of investigation23. As the focus of this Review, however, macroautophagy is hereafter termed autophagy.

The de novo synthesis of autophagosomes, which can range in diameter from hundreds of nanometres to tens of microns, and their subsequent fusion to the lysosome, makes autophagy the most versatile degradative pathway in the cell. As previously described24,25, the pathway can be separated into three phases: autophagosome biogenesis coupled to cargo capture; membrane growth and closure; and autophagosome maturation via fusion to endocytic and, ultimately, lysosomal structures for degradation (FIG. 1). Autophagy can sequester degradative cargo in two main ways: via the non-selective capture of cytoplasmic components at sites of autophagosome biogenesis, or via the selective capture of particular structures or organelles that are recognized by autophagy adaptor proteins and actively engulfed by an autophagosome (BOX 1).

Endocytic

Pertaining to the internalization of substances into the cell. These membrane-bound structures include endosomes and multivesicular bodies.

Autophagosome biogenesis begins with the activation of the Unc51-like autophagy activating kinase 1 (ULK1) complex, which acts to identify the membrane at which autophagosome biogenesis will occur. For non-selective cargo capture, the kinase complex can be induced by a broad range of cellular stressors, including nutrient shortage, oxidative stress and hypoxia, as it is regulated by the nutrient and metabolic kinases mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and 5′ AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)26,27. During selective cargo capture, which can occur in the absence of mTOR regulation28,29, the activation of the ULK1 kinase complex is coordinated with cargo consolidation, in part by the adaptor proteins involved in cargo capture itself30,31. Once activated, ULK1 phosphorylates ATG9 and beclin 1 (also known as ATG6), which in complex with ATG14L and the class III phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) vacuolar protein sorting 34 (VPS34)–VPS15 catalytic heterodimer (BOX 2) enriches the nucleation site with phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P), an important component of the autophagosome membrane (FIG. 1). With the recruitment of PI3P-binding proteins and de novo synthesis of phospholipids32, the autophagosome membrane elongates to envelop cargo.

Membrane elongation is accomplished by ATG2 and ATG9, which together act to transfer lipids and re-equilibrate the membrane33, along with two ubiquitin-like conjugation systems that lipidate ATG8 homologues through separate reactions. Lipidation of ATG8 homologues is necessary for their incorporation into the growing membrane, and components of these conjugation systems have been exploited for genetic abrogation of autophagy (TABLE 1). Autophagosome formation is then completed upon its closure, which may rely on members of the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) machinery such as charged multivesicular body protein 2A (CHMP2A)34,35.

Once formed, autophagosomes first fuse with endocytic structures to create amphisomes or directly with lysosomes, ultimately forming an autolysosome, in which the decreased pH activates lysosomal hydrolases to degrade cargo (FIG. 1). Studies have implicated the SNaRe protein syntaxin 17 in the fusion of the amphisome and autophagosome to the lysosome36, but the precise molecular requirements for fusion throughout this pathway remain poorly resolved.

SNARE protein

SNaP receptor, or SNaRe, proteins form a large family of proteins that mediate vesicle fusion.

An early indication that autophagy plays an important role in the CNS is reflected in how autophagy machinery responsible for creation of the autophagosome (reviewed extensively elsewhere24–26) is highly expressed across different cell types of the brain. The most recognized, yet most mysterious, autophagy protein may be MAP1 light chain 3 (LC3), which together with GABAA receptor-associated protein (GABARAP) represent the two families of mammalian homologues of yeast ATG8. LC3 has become synonymous with the autophagosome, as it was the first mammalian homologue identified37,38. This led to the development of tools to allow monitoring of these structures in vivo — from the biochemical evaluation of its membrane-bound form to assess autophagic activity38, to the development of fluorescently tagged LC3 (REF.39). It is important to note that of the six known mammalian homologues, three for LC3 (LC3A, LC3B and LC3C) and three for GABARAP (GABARAP, GABARAP-like 1 (GABARAPL1) and GABARAPL2), LC3 is less similar to yeast ATG8 than the GABARAP members and binds lipid least efficiently in vitro40. Studies suggest that GABARAPs may be critical for fusion of autophagosomes to lysosomes, whereas LC3 is not41,42. Additionally, GABARAP was so-named as it was previously shown to be essential for anterograde trafficking of GABAA receptors43. How its trafficking function and its role in autophagy might interrelate remains unclear.

Selective autophagy and adaptor proteins

As the importance of autophagy under basal conditions emerged, the concept that it could be a purely bulk degradation process was dismissed, leading to new questions about how autophagic cargoes were targeted for degradation. These studies have revealed that exogenous cargoes, such as invading pathogens, disease-associated structures, such as proteinaceous inclusions, and virtually all organelles rely on regulated degradation by this pathway, which can occur independently of the nutrient status of the cell (BOX 1). These findings have led to a notable conceptual shift in that the selective capture of autophagic cargoes governed by adaptor proteins may be the dominant basal mode of autophagy, whereas bulk, non-selective degradation might be relegated to emergent needs.

Echoing the yeast pathway described by Klionsky et al. as cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting (Cvt)44, specific cargoes can be targeted to the autophagosome by adaptor proteins, also known as autophagy receptors and selectivity adaptor proteins. In mammals, more than 20 adaptor proteins have thus far been identified25,45–47 (BOX 1). Adaptor proteins contain domains that bind cargo (ubiquitylated or non-ubiquitylated), a domain to attach to ATG8 homologues, and other elements for oligomerization and signalling, thereby scaffolding substrates to the growing autophagosomal membrane48,49. For a given substrate, many adaptor proteins can potentially be involved and, inversely, a given adaptor may link multiple cargo types. For example, adaptor proteins BCL-2 interacting protein 3 like (BNIP3L; also known as NIX), p62 (also known as SQSTM1) and optineurin (OPTN) have been implicated in mitochondrial turnover, whereas the adaptor p62 is involved in most types of selective autophagy and can itself be an autophagic substrate upon self-oligomerization50,51. When and how different adaptor proteins are used is currently under investigation, with studies suggesting that cell, cargo and stressor type play important roles52–54.

In the CNS, different autophagy cargoes are selectively eliminated (BOX 1). Little is known about the regulation of these pathways in the brain but examining the role of adaptor proteins using mouse genetics has led to modest results. For example, loss of function of p62 or OPTN leads to mild changes55–57, suggesting that these adaptor proteins may have redundant functions. Nonetheless, the adaptor Alfy (also known as WDFY3) was recently shown to be required for the turnover of protein aggregates in the adult brain58. Notably, as suggested by the conservation observed with Cvt, the importance of Alfy was consistent with conclusions drawn from HeLa cells59, indicating that mechanisms of selective autophagy are highly conserved across cell types. However, given the vast differences with which distinct neuronal cell types depend on autophagy, similar discrete differences would also be expected for selective autophagy.

One of the unexpected outcomes of the study of selective autophagy has been the identification of mutations in select adaptor proteins and other molecular players as contributors to diseases of both the developing and ageing CNS (TABLE 2). It is notable that, although deletion of the genes encoding p62 or OPTN in mice leads to little or no phenotype, potential loss-of-function mutations in the orthologous genes in humans cause disease. This may reflect how these adaptor proteins work, coupled with species-specific differences: both adaptor proteins directly interact with the LC3 isoforms and, whereas mice express two isoforms (LC3A and LC3B), humans also express a third isoform (LC3C) that is differentially modified60. The prevalence of neurological diseases due to loss of function of these selective autophagy proteins (TABLE 2) gives rise to the hypothesis that changes in homeostasis of discrete cargo, rather than changes in autophagy overall, may underlie the preferential vulnerability associated with specific diseases.

Autophagy modulation in the CNS

The regulation of autophagy is most frequently associated with inhibition of the central nutrient sensing kinase mTOR but AMPK and other proteins also have roles in such regulation26,27. In peripheral cells, nutrient deprivation inhibits mTOR to stimulate bulk autophagy. Whether organismal starvation induces neuronal autophagy and whether mTOR inhibition activates neuronal autophagy remain controversial39,61–64, especially in primary neurons7,65,66. In vivo studies have shown a role for mTOR-mediated autophagy regulation in neurons independently of nutrient sensing67–70, indicating that cells in the intact brain can dissociate this type of autophagy regulation from its classical signal transduction (that is, nutrient sensing) and may not be influenced by metabolic kinases in the same way as cells in peripheral tissues71. Differences between primary cells and neurons in situ may reflect the importance of the cellular milieu on autophagy regulation, and how the intact environment might be necessary to capture all facets of this pathway. An important consideration lacking in the field is how strongly starvation and mTOR inhibition might regulate autophagy in the nutrient-sensing cells of the CNS, including glia and cells of the vasculature (FIG. 2). Given the tight interconnectedness between these different cell types, there is the possibility that non-neuronal cells play a fundamental role from an organismal and tissue-wide perspective. Thus, to understand autophagy and how it may influence CNS health, it is necessary to improve our understanding of how autophagy is used by non-neuronal cells. Moreover, as noted above, if selective autophagy is an important component of CNS physiology and can occur independently of mTOR regulation, relying only on mTOR-mediated autophagosome formation as the readout of autophagic function may not fully consider selective mechanisms (that is, the functional contribution of cargo and related adaptor proteins), thus clouding our understanding of the true relationship between nutrient and energy sensing and autophagy activation in the CNS.

Given the importance of membrane trafficking in all cells of the CNS, special emphasis needs to be placed on understanding the subtle regulation of autophagy achieved through the balance of PI3P. Depending on the binding partners of the class III PI3K complex (BOX 2), PI3P can be allocated for autophagy, endosomal sorting, phagocytosis or other processes, including events that require autophagy proteins such as LC3 (REFS32,72,73) (BOX 3). Exogenously increasing PI3P levels in rapidly dividing cells can augment autophagy28, and therefore changing the balance or localization of ATG14 and its binding partners could potentially enhance or diminish autophagy versus other membrane trafficking events72,74,75. These considerations may help delineate the relative contribution of the many membrane trafficking events to the health of CNS cells.

Autophagy in cells of the CNS

Neuronal autophagy.

Among the studies of autophagy in cells of the CNS, studies on the role of autophagy in neurons are the most prevalent. Although neurons are perhaps the least responsive cell type to physiological starvation, early studies demonstrating the marked response of autophagy to degenerative events, along with early genetic studies in mice, likely drove this momentum. Subsequently, the potential for autophagy modulation as a therapeutic approach to multiple neurodegenerative diseases has driven significant interest in how neurons require autophagy to maintain their health.

Neurons are long-lived, terminally differentiated cells with complex morphologies and highly specialized functions that must be supported by appropriate catabolism. Inactivating autophagy within neuronal subtypes has revealed myriad roles for this pathway in protein homeostasis, organelle turnover, synaptic transmission and, ultimately, cellular integrity (TABLE 1). To contextualize these observations, two key aspects of neuronal autophagy must be considered: the intracellular location of this process and which cargoes are being degraded. To approach the former, a rich body of cell biological work has examined autophagy dynamics in cultured dorsal root ganglion neurons of the PNS, utilizing live cell imaging to track the behaviour of green fluorescent protein-tagged LC3. These studies describe autophagosome biogenesis exclusively at the distal axon, with structures fusing to lysosomes as they retrogradely traffic to the soma62,66,76–78. Applying similar approaches to the CNS, primary mouse hippocampal neurons show autophagosome formation predominantly in the distal axon but also in the cell body and dendrites62,66,67,77,79 (FIG. 2). Although studies in the dendritic compartment are limited, growing evidence suggests that autophagy is essential for establishing spine morphology68, and studies have shown that autophagosome biogenesis in the postsynaptic somatodendritic compartment can be activity dependent67,79. It has been speculated that neurons compartmentalize autophagosome biogenesis distally and lysosomal degradation proximally to efficiently meet the high trafficking demands of axonal transport. In the CNS, this compartmentalization appears to be unique to neurons, with autophagosome biogenesis and lysosomal fusion occurring throughout the entirety of astrocytes80 and oligodendrocytes81 (FIG. 2).

Activity dependent

Affected by synaptic transmission.

As we have learned how discrete neuronal compartments rely on autophagy, we are starting to understand the molecular identity of the cargoes being degraded. Nonetheless, we are only beginning to understand how this versatile pathway is being used by the cell. As with all eukaryotic cells, the outright loss of autophagy in neurons leads to a profound disruption of protein homeostasis, causing an accumulation of inclusions of ubiquitinated proteins and p62 throughout the cell10,11. Although these inclusions were considered the causative event leading to observed behavioural dysfunction and neurodegeneration, it was soon shown that, despite resolving inclusion body formation, there was neither an improvement nor an exacerbation of the neurodegenerative phenotype56, reinvigorating the question of how neuronal homeostasis was maintained by autophagy. Autophagy has since been implicated in the regulation of synaptic morphology and function by turning over species in both the presynaptic and postsynaptic compartments, from synaptic vesicle components in dopaminergic and hippocampal neurons to postsynaptic density components (for example, postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD95), ARC, and glutamate and GABA receptors) in hippocampal and cortical neurons64,67,68,82–86.

Consistent with these observations, pharmacological manipulation of autophagy in hippocampal neurons indicates involvement of this pathway in memory formation, potentially by increasing dendritic spine density and promoting long-term potentiation87. Autophagy has also been shown to be involved in NMDA receptor-dependent long-term depression (NMDAR-LTD) in a complex manner; whereas autophagy inhibition may be involved in NMDAR-LTD induction88, accumulating evidence suggests that autophagy is required for early phase NMDAR-LTD by degrading PSD95, which reorganizes the synaptic surface for AMPA receptor mobilization and changes in synaptic strength89. Subsequently, the transcription of autophagy genes induced by neuronal activity has been shown to maintain late-phase NMDAR-LTD90. In addition to autophagic degradation of synaptic contents, proteins that are enriched in these compartments can also regulate autophagy84,86,91. For example, the presynaptic proteins Bassoon and Piccolo have been shown to negatively regulate autophagy in the presynaptic bouton of hippocampal neurons via interaction with ATG5 (REFS82,83). Autophagosome formation in the presynapse has also been shown to involve the endocytic protein endophilin A, which is activated by the Parkinson disease (PD)-associated leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2)92. The PD-associated lipid phosphatase synaptojanin (FIG. 3) has been shown to be similarly important for presynaptic autophagy93. Although synaptic function is fundamental to all neuronal subtypes, observations in medium spiny neurons of the striatum have revealed that a subtype-specific reliance on autophagy can still be observed: medium spiny neurons in the direct and indirect pathway respectively require autophagy for degradation of presynaptic components to establish dendritic structure and degradation of ion channels to establish intrinsic excitability94. In addition to synaptic proteins, the autophagic turnover of mitochondria and ER can broadly influence neuronal function through, for example, the critical role of these substrates in calcium buffering95. In fact, a recent study using cultured neurons elucidated a role for presynaptic autophagy of ER in controlling ER calcium stores, which in turn regulate neurotransmission96.

As mentioned above, neuronal subtypes show a differential vulnerability to autophagy dysfunction, with Purkinje cells manifesting early degenerative changes10,11, while dopaminergic neurons16,67 and spinal motor neurons97 showing diminished vulnerability to outright degeneration, although morphological and electrophysiological abnormalities are present (TABLE 1). In Purkinje cells, autophagy inhibition by either Atg5 or Atg7 disruption produces an accumulation of membranous structures, axonopathy and dystrophic neurons13,98; however, rather than wholly considering autophagy inhibition detrimental and its activation beneficial, autophagy hyperactivation in Purkinje cells has been shown to be toxic and its inhibition can be beneficial in settings of excitotoxic stress6,12. Taken together, these results illustrate the complexity of the roles of autophagy in the CNS and that heterogeneous neuronal populations rely on the process for proper function but with discrete differences.

Glial autophagy.

We are just beginning to understand how diverse populations of glia use autophagy under basal and stress conditions. Autophagosomes constitutively form in glia39 (FIG. 2) and can do so in mTOR-dependent and mTOR-independent manners99–101. In response to proteotoxic stress, autophagic turnover of aggregated proteins has been demonstrated in astrocytes99,102, oligodendrocytes103 and microglia104,105.

As the cells responsible for metabolic buffering and modulation of synaptic transmission, astrocytes and their homeostatic signalling have received much attention. Similar to the early studies in neurons, astrocyte autophagy has mostly been studied as a stress reactivity pathway. In response to acute mechanical injury to the cortex, neuroinflammation induces Atg7-dependent mitophagy in astrocytes to maintain mitochondrial network integrity, reduce reactive oxygen species concentrations and prevent astrocyte death106. In the setting of hypoxia and ischaemia–reperfusion injury, there is evidence for both adaptive107 and detrimental108 roles for astrocyte autophagy for glial and neuronal survival, the precise balance of which remains to be established. The basal role of astrocyte autophagy is not well understood.

Ischaemia–reperfusion injury

Exacerbation of cellular dysfunction and death after the return of blood flow (reperfusion) to tissues that previously had an inadequate blood supply (ischaemia).

Oligodendrocytes appear to use autophagy as a similar prosurvival adaptation to stress, using it to promote neurological recovery after traumatic spinal cord injury109. A recent study showed that proper timing and location of myelination by oligodendrocytes is controlled by a lysosomal–apoptotic signalling axis110; although autophagy per se was not examined in this study, the findings suggest that myelin components can be degradative cargo in these cells. Although several studies have proposed a role for autophagy in myelin formation and degradation, most have relied on indirect evidence by using pleiotropic autophagy inducers such as mTOR inhibition and starvation paradigms111,112. Therefore, the direct role of autophagy in supporting the myelinating function of oligodendrocytes remains to be established.

Microglia are essential for phagocytic activity in the developing and adult brain, and autophagy machinery has been more closely associated with these dynamic membrane functions than those in other glial subtypes. With implications for autism spectrum disorder, microglial loss of Atg7 results in increased dendritic spine density at glutamatergic synapses and abnormal social interaction and repetitive behaviours, suggesting that microglial autophagy, or possibly non-canonical pathways such as LC3-associated phagocytosis (LAP) and LC3-associated endocytosis (LANDO) (BOX 3), are critical for proper synaptic pruning during development113. Microglial autophagy may also enhance the clearance of amyloid-β104,114–116, with the important caveat that amyloid-β is a cargo for LANDO in these cells117 (BOX 3). However, a recent study has found that microglia can internalize neuron-released α-synuclein independently from phagocytosis or endocytosis (that is, LAP or LANDO), and require autophagy via interaction with p62 for degradation105.

Neurovascular autophagy.

The intimate relationship between CNS cells and their blood vessels has long been observed, especially in cerebrovascular disease, but only recently have we appreciated the multidimensional roles of the neurovascular unit (NVU) — comprising vascular cells (pericytes, endothelial cells), glia and neurons — broadly in health and disease118. Investigations of autophagy in the NVU are rare, with studies in astrocytes being the most prevalent. As is common for early exploratory studies, the role of autophagy in response to acute stressors has been evaluated, and little is known about its basal role in the health and survival of these cells as a functional unit. NVU autophagy is often studied in neurons and glia as a response to vascular insult in the setting of ischaemic stroke. Relatively few have examined autophagy specifically in endothelial cells of the NVU but the picture that has emerged is one of prosurvival adaptation to nutrient deprivation, hypoxia and ischaemia–reperfusion injury119–121. Neurovascular dysfunction, as indicated by microvascular damage, alterations in blood–brain barrier permeability and cerebral perfusion abnormalities, has been observed across many neurodegenerative diseases, including forms of PD, Alzheimer disease (AD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)118,122–124. How this dysfunction may involve NVU autophagy requires further study.

Neurodevelopmental disorders

Many autophagy machinery components are highly expressed in the developing brain and are subsequently downregulated, suggesting an important role for autophagy during this period of rapid cellular remodelling. Mutations in genes encoding autophagy machinery components as well as upstream regulators, including mTOR, can affect the developing CNS, leading to a range of deficits, from widespread dysfunction to discrete neurological changes125–129. In model systems, loss-of-function studies indicate that autophagy machinery and regulators are important for fate specification130,131, cellular migration132,133, axon guidance131,132,134,135 and synaptic remodelling68,136,137 (TABLE 1).

The described cell biological effects can be due to machinery dysfunction at different stages of the autophagy pathway. For example, axon guidance defects occur by disrupting proteins involved in autophagy induction (for example, ULK1 and ULK2)131, autophagosome biogenesis (for example, ATG7)134 and cargo capture (for example, Alfy)132. Particular players can also cause a wide breadth of phenotypes: mutations in WDFY3 are associated with autism spectrum disorder and microcephaly138, and chronic suppression of mTOR-dependent autophagy is implicated in both the neuropsychiatric manifestation of tuberous sclerosis I and the synaptic defects in fragile X syndrome139. Human genetic studies have shown that mutations in ATG5 (REF.125) and, recently, ATG7 (REF.129) can cause syndromes involving ataxia and developmental delay, adding clinical insight into the consequence of global autophagy dysfunction and its convergence on the nervous and musculoskeletal systems. Given the role of autophagy in essential cellular processes in neurodevelopment, it is perhaps unsurprising that defects in core autophagy machinery components can lead to a wide range of disorders, often sharing developmental delay as a main feature.

In addition, a diverse group of developmental disorders that affect the CNS are caused by mutations in single genes that have roles in autophagy and general membrane trafficking, supporting the idea that neurodevelopment is especially sensitive to changes in membrane dynamics138. Vici syndrome, a multisystem disorder with defective autophagy caused by mutations in the gene encoding ectopic P granules protein 5 (EPG5)140, features an absent corpus callosum and profound developmental delay141–143. β-Propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration, also known as static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration, is caused by de novo mutations in the X-linked gene WDR45 (also known as WIPI4; encoding WD repeat domain phosphoinositide-interacting protein 4)144,145 and manifests with seizures, infantile-onset developmental delay, intellectual disability and ataxia. With age, these patients exhibit cognitive decline, movement disorders and neurodegeneration. The yeast homologue of WDR45 is atg18, which associates with PI3P for autophagic vacuole formation146. Sorting nexin 14 (SNX14)-associated autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia and intellectual disability syndrome147 has been linked to impaired autophagosome clearance and lysosomal function in model systems and patient-derived cells148. Three forms of hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG11, SPG15 and SPG49) are caused by genes that are involved in early autophagosome formation149,150. In humans, mutations in VPS15, encoding a component of the VPS34 complex (BOX 2), cause developmental cortical atrophy and epilepsy. In mice, Vps15 hypomorphism disrupts endosomal–lysosomal trafficking and its ablation causes the accumulation of autophagic structures and, ultimately, cortical atrophy151. Although these mutations can be linked to autophagy changes, their effects can also be attributed to overall membrane trafficking alterations, which may explain the breadth of features observed.

Adult-onset neurodegenerative diseases

Perhaps the most widely studied area of CNS autophagy is its role in neurodegenerative disease. Genetic and pathological evidence has connected autophagy directly or indirectly to all commonly studied adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders, including AD, ALS, frontotemporal dementia (FTD)/frontotemporal lobar dementia (FTLD), Huntington disease (HD), PD and other synucleinopathies such as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and multiple systems atrophy (MSA) (FIG. 3). As discussed above, loss-of-function studies have shown that autophagy is essential for neural health10,11 (TABLE 1), but the direct links between autophagy and neurodegenerative disease pathogenesis remain to be established. Across these diseases, autophagy dysfunction may be the primary insult, contribute to or modify underlying mechanisms, or be epiphenomena alongside degenerative events. Given that complete loss of autophagy in neural cells causes degeneration in the early postnatal period in animal studies and that severe dysfunction can be incompatible with life or cause paediatric neurological deficits, the adult-onset and cell type-specific nature of these diseases suggests that subtle autophagy alterations can cause pathology to accumulate over time, that ageing shifts how the CNS relies on autophagy mechanisms or that a combination of the two occurs.

When we organize disease-associated genes by their putative sites of involvement along the autophagy pathway (FIG. 3a), models of autophagy dysfunction emerge. Cargo capture and autophagosome formation are more represented by ALS/FTD-causative genes (FIG. 3b); PD-associated mutations are found either at cargo capture or degradation (FIG. 3c); and late-onset AD (LOAD) susceptibility loci map onto later stages of the pathway involving autophagosome maturation and fusion with the lysosome (FIG. 3d). Additionally, genetic disruptions in the cargoes themselves (for example, huntingtin in HD; TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43), fused in sarcoma (FUS) and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) in ALS and FTD/FTLD; α-synuclein in PD, DLB and MSA) can lead to pathology152,153 as can mutations in autophagy adaptors (reviewed in REF.154) (TABLE 2) and other selective autophagy machinery.

At the level of cargo capture, mutations in autophagy-related proteins have been identified in patients with ALS, a disease characterized by degeneration of upper and lower motor neurons and subsequent muscle weakness, disability and death. Mutations in genes encoding p62 (REFS155,156), the mitophagy adaptor OPTN157 or its partner TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1)158 can cause rare, familial forms of ALS. The phosphorylation of OPTN and p62 by TBK1 has been shown to be required for the targeting of these adaptors to the autophagosome159 (FIG. 3b). TBK1 is also a component of the innate immune response by regulating type I interferon signalling160, connecting autophagy and innate immunity at the mitochondrion161. Recent studies have shown that motor neuron autophagy loss97, Tbk1 heterozygosity162 or ALS-linked TBK1 mutations163 modify pathogenesis and progression of the SOD1-G93A mouse model of ALS such that disease onset is accelerated but lifespan is extended. These suggest that autophagy is important for maintenance of the neuromuscular junction but, later in disease course, could contribute to degeneration via aberrant autophagy and inflammation in motor neurons, interneurons and glia. These studies further emphasize the need to understand how autophagy functions across the discrete cell types of the CNS in physiological and pathological states.

Upper and lower motor neurons

Upper motor neurons project from the motor cortex of the cerebrum and brainstem to form the corticospinal, corticobulbar and other tracts. lower motor neurons project from the spinal cord to effector muscles to carry out a movement.

It is increasingly clear that ALS exists on an aetiological and clinicopathological spectrum with FTD, as the hexanucleotide (G4C2) repeat expansion at the C9ORF72 locus is the most common cause of sporadic and familial ALS and FTD164,165. Studies of the C9ORF72 protein strongly suggest that it plays a regulatory role in autophagosome biogenesis and membrane trafficking events166,167 (FIG. 3b). With its expansion creating dipeptide repeat protein products that can aggregate, the hexanucleotide repeat may serve as a second hit with proteotoxic stress, further exacerbating the impact of diminished autophagosome biogenesis168,169. Mutations in TARDBP, the gene encoding TDP43, can cause ALS/FTD153,170–172, and TDP43-positive aggregates are observed in patients with and without TARDBP mutations173,174. Not only can these TDP43-positive inclusions be substrates for autophagy175,176 but TDP43 itself has been implicated in the transcriptional regulation of autophagy-associated genes through its function as a DNA/RNA-binding protein and splicing regulator177–179. Together, both C9ORF72-associated and TARDBP-associated ALS/FTD show potential feedforward loops related to autophagic substrate burden and regulation. Examining the many disease-causing mutations in ALS, a model for autophagy dysfunction as a key pathogenic player can be drawn (FIG. 3b).

In PD, progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta leads to the clinical features of tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and postural instability. Hypotheses of autophagy dysfunction in PD have been supported by human pathology and genetic studies, which implicate presynaptic autophagy and the autophagic turnover of certain cargoes (α-synuclein and mitochondria) in pathophysiology180 (FIG. 3c). The first gene implicated in PD was SNCA, which encodes α-synuclein181,182. α-Synuclein is not only a cargo for autophagy but has been associated with multiple vesicular trafficking events, including autophagy and lysosomal function183–185. Additionally, α-synuclein often accumulates in Lewy bodies in brain tissue from patients with idiopathic PD as well as other synucleinopathies186,187. Other autophagy-related proteins implicated in disease are PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) and parkin (encoded by PRKN) (BOX 1; FIG. 3c). Mutations in either PINK1 or PRKN can cause rare, autosomal recessive, early-onset PD188,189, and have been connected to mitophagy by cell-based and invertebrate studies190–192. Notably, loss of these PD-causative genes in mice or rats does not result in defective mitophagy or recapitulate disease193,194 (TABLE 1), raising the question of if and how PINK1-dependent or parkin-dependent mitophagy contributes to PD in humans. In mice, combined burdens of Pink1 or Prkn deletion with either peripheral inflammation195 or mitochondrial DNA mutational stress196 produce PD-like dopaminergic neuron loss and motor dysfunction, suggesting complex interactions between autophagy machinery, mitochondrial quality control and inflammation. The role of these interactions in human neurodegenerative disease remains to be fully explored.

As described above, the PD-associated LRRK2 and synaptojanin (encoded by SYNJ1) (FIG. 3c) have been shown to regulate presynaptic autophagy92,93. Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons from patients with mutated SYNJ1 exhibit accumulation of new autophagic structures that cannot mature93. These studies suggest potential convergent mechanisms of disease in LRRK2-associated and synaptojanin-associated PD84,91. How the proposed mechanisms of mitophagy dysfunction and presynaptic autophagy dysfunction may interrelate, and their importance in idiopathic or other familial forms of PD, remain to be determined.

Later in the autophagy pathway, defects in autophagosome–lysosome fusion and acidification are also associated with disease, particularly in PD (FIG. 3c) and AD (FIG. 3d). Genes encoding various lysosomal components can cause PD and AD in addition to lysosomal storage disorders that have neurological manifestations197. The genetic contributors to AD are complex but some insight is provided when stratifying by age of onset. In contrast to the genetic risk of early-onset AD, characterized by a small number of highly penetrant mutations, LOAD appears to result from multiple low penetrance mutations that may interact with one another and environmental factors. Interestingly, LOAD risk variants cluster around the endo-lysosomal system; for example, bridging integrator 1 (BIN1) and CD2-associated protein (CD2AP) seem to have roles in endosomal transport, while progranulin (GRN) and phospholipase D3 (PLD3) are localized to the lysosome198 (FIG. 3d). Studies in AD suggest that impaired lysosome-mediated clearance is pathogenic, while autophagosome formation appears adequate199–201. The AD brain is characterized by pathological accumulation of extracellular amyloid-β plaques and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tau-containing tangles202. Although amyloid-β203 and tau204 are cargo for autophagy (FIG. 3d), with the former relying on autophagy machinery for secretion into the extracellular space and the latter using autophagy for degradation, the recently identified role of microglial LANDO in AD pathology117 must be considered when investigating early autophagic events in AD.

In addition to its dysfunction being central to disease pathogenesis, another area in which autophagy is often examined is for its ability to eliminate aggregated proteins. From pathological studies in humans, a hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases is the accumulation of protein aggregates and/or dysfunctional organelles (for example, mitochondria) in vulnerable cell types205. Such proteins include, but are not limited to, amyloid-β and tau in AD; mutant huntingtin in HD; α-synuclein in PD, DLB and MSA; tau, TDP43 and FUS in FTD/FTLD; and p62, TDP43, FUS and SOD1 in ALS (FIG. 3). This has led to the pathophysiological designation of these disorders as proteinopathies, with the hypothesis that aggregates disrupt critical cellular processes and that dysfunctional catabolism contributes to disease. In support of this, the aggrephagy adaptor Alfy has been shown to modify HD pathogenesis in model systems and cells from patients with this disease58. The identification of Alfy as an adaptor protein for aggrephagy allows for studies segregating the contribution of inclusions, rather than non-aggregated mutant protein, to pathogenesis. Consistent with cell-based studies59, Alfy has been shown to be essential for aggregate turnover in the cells of the adult brain. Loss of function in a mouse model of HD led to an accelerated appearance of aggregated proteins and an accelerated onset of motor dysfunction. Notably, it did not accelerate cell death, suggesting that, at least in HD, the proteinopathy can modify disease onset but not necessarily impact neurodegeneration58. Alternatively, given that this model does not have a neurodegenerative phenotype, increasing aggregation was not sufficient to produce vulnerability to degenerative events. In cell-based studies, Alfy gain of function has been shown to increase aggregate clearance59. Whether this outcome will be replicated in vivo and whether it might bring phenotypic benefit remains to be seen, especially given how autophagy dysfunction is a feature associated with all proteinopathies.

Conclusions

Taken together, autophagy is a fundamental pathway for neural cells that is used to maintain homeostasis and augments in response to stress. It is essential in the developing and ageing brain, and the broad use of this pathway has complicated our understanding of how it contributes to disease. Despite the many gains that have been made over the past two decades, there is still much to be learned from further study of CNS autophagy. A prominent question that arises from observations across human genetics and model systems is how the disruption of this single pathway can lead to a wide array of diseases that primarily impact the CNS. We hypothesize that the answer might lie not in the gross disruption of the pathway per se but, rather, on unique combinations of factors: which cell types exhibit autophagy dysfunction, where in the cell the defects are occurring, which cargoes might be especially affected and where in the pathway the dysfunction is observed. Thus far, insights gained from the broad range of diseases that arise from mutations in genes encoding selective autophagy adaptor proteins suggest that the turnover of specific cargoes may contribute to the unique pathological signature of each disease. However, since we still understand very little about how the vast majority of cells in the CNS rely on this fundamental pathway, our insight remains limited.

As our knowledge of this fundamental pathway grows, we will benefit from investigating the areas described here to untangle the complex roles of CNS autophagy in health and disease. Considering therapeutic approaches aimed at augmenting autophagic degradation, it is increasingly clear that we must better understand the interrelationship between the different selective pathways, if any should exist, and the limiting factors for autophagy, including how different cell types require autophagy, and which cargoes are particularly sensitive to autophagy dysfunction. For example, would the enhanced turnover of aggregated proteins diminish the turnover of mitochondria or ER, or are the pathways physically or mechanistically distinct enough that each selective pathway might be independently manipulated? By integrating the progress made thus far, enhanced resolution will provide a more comprehensive framework for understanding autophagy in basal physiology of the CNS, its contribution to pathology in developmental and adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders, and opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank the members of the Yamamoto laboratory for helpful discussion. This work was supported by the NINDS F31 NS118897 (C.J.G.), NINDS RO1 NS063973 (A.Y.), NINDS RO1NS077111 (A.Y.), NINDS RO1 NS101663 (C.J.G. and A.Y.), NINDS R21 NS118891 (A.Y.), The Hereditary Disease Foundation with the Alexander Boyd and Jane Starke Boyd Charitable Foundation, Thompson Family Foundation, the Russell Berrie Foundation Initiative in the Neurobiology of Obesity at Columbia University and the MSTP Training grant 5T32GM007367 (C.J.G.).

Fig. 1 | Molecular overview of autophagy and related membrane trafficking events.

Autophagy initiates with ULK complex-mediated autophagosome biogenesis, promoting formation of the isolation membrane, or phagophore, by a series of enzymatic reactions involving autophagy-related (ATG) proteins and incorporation of ATG8 homologues (for example, LC3) into the growing membrane. Autophagosomes form either non-selectively around bulk cytosol or coordinate with adaptor proteins or autophagy receptors (ARs) to selectively capture specific cargo. Nascent autophagosomes can fuse to endosomes and multivesicular bodies to form the intermediate structure, called the amphisome, or directly with lysosomes to form the autolysosome. Ultimately, lysosomal hydrolases degrade the cargo captured by the autophagosome. Autophagy exhibits crosstalk with other membrane trafficking events. Critical for this crosstalk is the regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-monophosphate (PI3P) by the lipid kinase complex VPS34–VPS15–beclin 1. Depending on binding partners, PI3P can be shunted to autophagy, endosome–lysosome formation or non-canonical membrane fates, including ATG-dependent secretion and LC3-associated phagocytosis (LAP) or LC3-associated endocytosis (not shown).

Fig. 2 | Autophagy in cells of the CNS.

Schematic depicting spatial dynamics and example cargo captured by autophagosomes in neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes and microglia. The boxes indicate the cell type and the most prevalently described cargoes. Blue c-shaped structures represent newly forming autophagosomes (phagophores) to indicate potential sites of autophagosome biogenesis; differently shaded blue circles are autophagosomes, amphisomes and autolysosomes; yellow circles indicate the localization of lysosomes. In microglia, red circles represent vesicles formed by LC3-associated phagocytosis and endocytosis, a feature noted in such cells. Only in neuronal axons, the newly formed autophagosomes must traffic in a retrograde manner to the soma to permit fusion to lysosomes, which are concentrated at the soma. Autophagosome biogenesis in the dendritic and somatic compartments likely represents capture of postsynaptic cargo, mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Compartmentalization does not seem to be as rigid for astrocytes and oligodendrocytes as autophagosome biogenesis and lysosomal fusion occurs throughout these cells.

Fig. 3 | Models of autophagy dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.

The neurodegenerative diseases amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Parkinson disease (PD) and late-onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) occur predominantly without known genetic causes. Even within the small proportion of cases for which monogenic aetiologies or risk loci have been identified, convergent pathophysiology remains elusive. To begin to understand the role of autophagy in these mechanisms of disease, disease-causative, disease-associated and disease-susceptibility genes for familial or known genetic forms of ALS/FTD, PD and LOAD are mapped onto their putative sites of function in the autophagy pathway. a | Schematic of autophagosome biogenesis and cargo capture, autophagosome maturation, and fusion of structures to lysosomes for degradation. b | In ALS/FTD, mutations in FUS (encoding fused in sarcoma (FUS)), TARDBP (encoding TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43)) and SOD1 (encoding superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1)) can cause disease, and their protein products as well as UBQLN2 have been identified as autophagic cargo and can accumulate in tissue from idiopathic cases and cases with other genetic aetiologies. Other genetic aetiologies include hexanucleotide repeat expansion at the C9ORF72 locus, whose protein product forms a complex that is implicated in autophagosome biogenesis. Optineurin (OPTN) and p62 are known autophagy adaptors, which are phosphorylated by TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), an event essential for targeting these adaptors and their associated cargoes for autophagic degradation. VCP, progranulin (GRN) and FIG4 are implicated in membrane trafficking and lysosome function. c | In PD, mutations in PINK1 and PRKN (encoding parkin) can cause autosomal recessive, early-onset PD, with cell biological studies connecting them to mitophagy. SNCA encodes α-synuclein (SNCA), a cargo for autophagy and a pathological component of Lewy bodies in brain tissue from patients with idiopathic PD and other synucleinopathies. SNCA and leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been broadly associated with different steps of autophagy. Other known causes of familial PD are primarily associated with autophagosome maturation. d | The genetic determinants of AD are not well understood, but a number of risk loci for the development of LOAD have been identified. The risk-associated genes have roles in the regulation of endocytic transport or are localized to the lysosome. These include TREM2, APOE4, BIN1, CD2AP, PICALM and PLD3. Orange ovals depict protein cargoes that are degraded by autophagy and can be mutated in disease, and beige ovals represent all other types of molecular players. BIN1, bridging integrator 1; CD2AP, CD2-associated protein; CHMP2A, charged multivesicular body protein 2A; PINK1, PTEN-induced kinase 1; PLD3, phospholipase D3; SYNJ1, synaptojanin 1.

Table 1 | Autophagy loss-of-function studies in the mammalian CNS

Gene	Nature of disruption (Cre, expression onset age)	Autophagy pathway	Loss-of-function consequences on the CNS	Refs	
Ambra1	Global KO	Autophagosome biogenesis	Embryonic lethality, neural tube defects, cell proliferation in fetal brain, increased apoptosis	Fimia et al. (2007)206, Cullup et al. (2013)140	
Atg5	CNS/PNS KO (Nes–Cre, E15.5)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions, neurodegeneration, motor defects	Hara et al. (2006)11	
Atg5	Global KO	Autophagosome biogenesis	Perinatal lethality	Kuma et al. (2004)207, Qu et al. (2007)208	
Atg5	Purkinje cells (Pcp2–Cre, P6)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Dystrophic neurons, axonal degeneration, ataxia	Nishiyama et al., 200798	
Becn1	Global KO	Autophagosome biogenesis	Early embryonic lethality, ectodermal defects	Yue et al. (2003)209, Qu et al. (2007)208	
Atg7	CNS/PNS KO (Nes–Cre, E15.5)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions, neurodegeneration, axonal degeneration, motor defects	Komatsu et al. (2006)10	
Atg7	Purkinje cells (Pcp2–Cre, P6)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Dystrophic neurons, axonal degeneration, ataxia	Komatsu et al. (2007)13	
Atg7	Dopaminergic neurons (Slc6a3(DAT)–Cre, E15; Th–Cre, E16.5; En1–Cre, E9)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Striatal dopamine depletion, dysfunctional presynaptic terminals, protein inclusions, neurodegeneration	Hernandez et al. (2012)67, Friedman et al. (2012)15, Ahmed et al. (2012)14, Inoue et al. (2013)16, Sato et al. (2018)17	
Atg7	Hypothalamic AGRP neurons (Agrp–Cre, E4)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Impaired hypothalamic response to starvation	Kaushik et al. (2011)63	
Atg7	Hypothalamic POMC neurons (Pomc–Cre, P0)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions, axonal defects, impaired lipid catabolism	Kaushik et al. (2012)210, Coupe et al. (2012)134	
Atg7	Global KO	Autophagosome biogenesis	Perinatal lethality	Komatsu et al. (2005)61	
Atg7	Direct, indirect MSNs (Drd1–Cre, E17; Adora2a–Cre, E15.5)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Defects in dendritic structure, intrinsic excitability, motor learning	Lieberman et al. (2020)94	
Atg7	Spinal motor neurons (Chat–Cre, E15.5)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions, presynaptic dysfunction at the neuromuscular junction	Rudnick et al. (2017)97	
Atg7	Forebrain pyramidal cells (Camk2a–Cre, P0)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions, impaired long-term potentiation and fear memory	Inoue et al. (2012)204	
Atg7	Microglia (Cx3cr1–CreER, induced P60)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions	Choi et al. (2020)105	
Rb1cc1	CNS/PNS KO (Nes–Cre, E15.5)	Autophagosome biogenesis	Protein inclusions, axonal degeneration, neurodegeneration, motor defects	Liang et al. (2010)211	
Epg 5	Global KO	Autophagosome maturation	Protein inclusions, neurodegeneration, motor defects	Cullup et al. (2013)140, Zhao et al. (2013)142, Byrne et al. (2016)141	
Snx14	Global KO	Autophagosome maturation	Autophagosome accumulation, lysosomal dysfunction	Thomas et al. (2014)147, Akizu et al. (2015)148	
Vps15	Global KO	Autophagosome maturation	Protein inclusions, neurodegeneration	Gstrein et al. (2018)151	
Wdfy3	Global KO	Cargo capture	Midline crossing and cell migration defects	Dragich et al. (2016)132, Orosco et al. (2014)133	
Fam134b	Global KO	Cargo capture	Endoplasmic reticulum expansion, peripheral neuropathy	Kurth et al. (2009)212, Khaminets et al. (2015)213	
Optn	Global KO	Cargo capture	Protein inclusions	Maruyama et al. (2010)157, Kurashige et al. (2021)57	
Sqstm1	Global KO	Cargo capture	None	Komatsu et al. (2007)56	
Prkn	Global KO	Cargo capture	Mild physiology and behaviour changes	Goldberg et al. (2003)193, Perez &amp; Palmiter (2005)194	
Pink1	Global KO	Cargo capture	Mild physiology and behaviour changes	Oliveras-Salva et al. (2011)214	
AGRP, agouti-related protein; DAT, dopamine transporter; E, embryonic day; KO, knockout; MSN, medium spiny neuron; P, postnatal day; PNS, peripheral nervous system; POMC, pro-opiomelanocortin.

Table 2 | Autophagy adaptor proteins associated with neurological disease

Adaptor or receptor	Autophagic cargo	Non-autophagic functions	Neurological disorders associated with genetic variants	Neurological disorders associated with pathology	Refs	
p62 (also known as SQSTM1)	Protein aggregates, mitochondria, peroxisomes, microbes	NF-κB signalling, apoptosis	ALS/FTD, AD	ALS/FTD, AD, PD, HD	Matsumoto et al. (2011)215, Teyssou et al. (2013)156, Rea et al. (2014)216, Cuyvers et al. (2015)217, Komatsu et al. (2012)218, Moscat et al. (2009)219, Moscat et al. (2016)220	
OPTN	Mitochondria, microbes, non-ubiquitylated inclusions	Interferon signalling	ALS/FTD	HD, PD	Padman et al. (2019)221, Heo et al. (2015)222, Schwab et al. (2012)223, Maruyama et al. (2010)157, Mankouri et al. (2010)224, Outlioua et al. (2018)225	
NBR1	Protein aggregates	None known	None known	PD, HD	Odagiri et al. (2012)226, Rue et al. (2013)227	
Alfy (also known as WDFY3)	Protein aggregates	None known	ASD, schizophrenia, microcephaly	ALS/FTD, AD, PD, HD	Fox et al. (2020)58, Stessman et al. (2017)228, Iossifov et al. (2014)229, Clausen et al. (2010)230, Filimonenko et al. (2010)59	
CALCOCO2 (also known as NDP52)	Mitochondria, protein aggregates, microbes	NF-κB, interferon signalling	None known	AD	Padman et al. (2019)221, Heo et al. (2015)222, Kim et al. (2014)231, Fan et al. (2020)232, Till et al. (2013)233, Jin et al. (2018)234	
NUFIP1	Ribosomes	Nucleocytoplasmic mRNA transport	PEHO syndrome	None known	Sabaie et al. (2020)235, Wyant et al. (2019)236, Bardoni et al. (2003)237	
ATL3	ER	Vesicle trafficking, viral replication	HSAN-I	None known	Chen et al. (2019)238, Kornak et al. (2014)239, Neufeldt et al. (2019)240	
RTN3	ER	Apoptosis, proteolysis	AD	None known	Zou et al. (2018)241, Murayama et al. (2006)242, Kuang et al. (2005)243, Tang et al. (2007)244	
FAM134B	ER	Cell cycle, apoptosis, viral replication	HSAN-II	None known	Kurth et al. (2009)212, Khaminets et al. (2015)213, Mo et al. (2020)245, Chiramel et al. (2016)246	
AD, Alzheimer disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; HD, Huntington disease; HSAN-I/II, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type I/II; OPTN, optineurin; PD, Parkinson disease; PEHO, progressive encephalopathy with oedema, hypsarrhythmia and optic atrophy.

Box 1 | Types and mechanisms of selective autophagy

Autophagy can non-selectively degrade bulk cytosol, classically described in peripheral tissues under conditions of starvation. We now appreciate that certain molecular events can promote autophagic degradation of select structures. To undergo selective autophagy, cargoes are scaffolded to the autophagosome membrane by adaptor proteins, which recognize signalling moieties on cargo, one of the best characterized being ubiquitin chains. Across phyla, various cargoes and adaptor proteins for selective autophagy have been described46,47 (see the figure). A given adaptor may scaffold multiple cargo types, and a given cargo type may involve multiple adaptor proteins. Importantly, some adaptors have shown functional redundancy (for example, p62 (also known as SQSTm1) and optineurin (oPTN)), complicating our understanding of the role of these pathways in physiological and pathological settings. In the mammalian CNS, the turnover of protein aggregates (aggrephagy), mitochondria (mitophagy), endoplasmic reticulum (eR-phagy) and stress granules (granulophagy) are the most studied, especially in neurons. Aggrephagy has been described from yeast to mammals and can engage multiple adaptor proteins247 (see the figure). Although a hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases, the direct connection between protein aggregates and pathology remains an active area of investigation58. mitophagy can occur by various mechanisms depending on signalling context. The most prominent mitophagy pathway involves the Parkinson disease-associated proteins PINK1 and parkin. After mitochondrial depolarization, PINK1 stabilizes on the outer mitochondrial membrane and recruits the e3 ubiquitin ligase parkin to ubiquitylate mitochondrial proteins, which attract adaptors oPTN, CAlCoCo2 (also known as NDP52) and p62. PINK1–parkin-independent and ubiquitin-independent mitophagy have also been described, involving other autophagy adaptors24 (see the figure). Additionally, the inner mitochondrial membrane phospholipid cardiolipin has been implicated in mitophagy by coordinating autophagy machinery upon its externalization to the outer mitochondrial membrane in neuronal cells248. The relative contribution of these in the CNS under basal and pathological conditions remains to be defined. Several ER-phagy adaptors have been identified (see the figure) and studied in the context of the CNS46,213, as they have also been associated with neurological disorders (TABLE 2). of note, although it has not been demonstrated that p62 is required for ER-phagy, it is associated with ER proteins249 and p62 knockout in the mouse CNS produces large neurites filled with smooth ER56. Whether potential relationships between the turnover of various cargoes exist remains an open question. Further cargoes and their adaptor proteins not shown on the figure have also been identified44,45.

Box 2 | Membrane trafficking fates and lipid kinase regulation

In cells of the CNS, membrane trafficking and phospholipid dynamics are inextricably linked to proper function250. Central to its regulation are three classes (I, II, III) of phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks), each with distinct roles in cellular health. The three classes generate different phosphoinositides, which recruit effector proteins to carry out membrane remodelling events251. The autophagy pathway is mainly regulated by the class III PI3K vPS34 in complex with vPS15 and beclin 1 (FIG. 1), with PI3P availability and PI3K function impacting autophagy at multiple points along the pathway, including isolation membrane initiation and maturation–expansion32,252. The vPS34 complex itself and autophagy overall exhibit vast crosstalk with endosomal, phagocytic and lysosomal pathways253, illustrating complex relationships between membrane sources and downstream use. understanding how these different compartments interact is particularly salient for cells of the CNS due to their composition, architecture and functional needs. Given that neural membranes are especially rich in cholesterol and sphingolipids, how cargoes interact with these membranes and specify their degradative fate is essential254. For example, for synaptic vesicles or neurotransmitter receptors in neurons, or for transmembrane proteins in oligodendrocytes, we must understand how these species are internalized and reach the lysosome under physiological and, possibly, pathological conditions.

Box 3 | Non-autophagic roles of autophagy machinery

The term ‘canonical autophagy’ refers to the molecules and functions involved in autophagosome biogenesis, maturation and fusion to the lysosome. Some pathway components, particularly the lipid conjugation machinery, carry out similar functions but do so in distinct membrane trafficking events, including internalization and ATG-dependent secretion (reviewed in REFS250,255,256). In particular, studies by Green and others have shown that changes in the regulation of the vPS34 kinase complex can impact which membranes are ultimately conjugated to lC3, including those that enter the cell via phagocytosis or endocytosis: lC3-associated phagocytosis (lAP) in peripheral macrophages257–259 and retinal pigment epithelial cells260 involves lC3 conjugation and lysosomal degradation of distinct internalized substrates. lAP requires some but not all autophagy machinery components, including ATG7, ATG5 and certain vPS34 kinase complex members. lC3-associated endocytosis (lANDo) has been identified in microglia, in which internalized RAB-positive and clathrin-positive structures conjugate to lC3 and are degraded, and similarly requires a subset of autophagy machinery117. Focusing on the CNS, this suggests that at least phagocytic cells can shuttle membranes down degradative paths with distinct molecular requirements and regulation. This has raised questions surrounding the interpretation of studies that have primarily focused on Atg5 and Atg7 deletions (TABLE 1), which cannot distinguish between canonical autophagy, lAP and lANDo. Considering the high endocytic activity of neurons, glia and cells of the neurovasculature, the connection between endosomal systems and either autophagy36 or lAP and lANDo requires further study, and will be essential to dissect the relative importance of these membrane fates in specific cells of the CNS. members of the core autophagy machinery can also have non-autophagic roles outside of membrane trafficking, including in apoptotic or necroptotic pathways (for example, FIP200 and ATG7), innate immune signalling (for example, the ATG12–ATG5 complex), microtubule dynamics (for example, ATG5 and ATG16l1) and cell cycle regulation255,261. With implications for disease mechanisms, the autophagic and non-autophagic roles of these molecular players should be considered in future investigations.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.


1. Stavoe AKH &amp; Holzbaur ELF Autophagy in neurons. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol 35 , 477–500 (2019).31340124
2. Dixon JS “Phagocytic” lysosomes in chromatolytic neurones. Nature 215 , 657–658 (1967).6050233
3. Holtzman E &amp; Novikoff AB Lysosomes in the rat sciatic nerve following crush. J. Cell Biol 27 , 651–669 (1965).5885432
4. De Duve C &amp; Wattiaux R Functions of lysosomes. Annu. Rev. Physiol 28 , 435–492 (1966).5322983
After discovering the lysosome, De Duve created the term ‘autophagy’ and, along with Novikoff and others, laid the foundation for the subsequent decades of study of this process in the CNS.

5. Adhami F Cerebral ischemia-hypoxia induces intravascular coagulation and autophagy. Am. J. Pathol 169 , 566–583 (2006).16877357
6. Koike M Inhibition of autophagy prevents hippocampal pyramidal neuron death after hypoxic-ischemic injury. Am. J. Pathol 172 , 454–469 (2008).18187572
7. Young JE , Martinez RA &amp; La Spada AR Nutrient deprivation induces neuronal autophagy and implicates reduced insulin signaling in neuroprotective autophagy activation. J. Biol. Chem 284 , 2363–2373 (2009).19017649
8. Tsukada M &amp; Ohsumi Y Isolation and characterization of autophagy-defective mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 333 , 169–174 (1993).8224160
By screening mutant yeast for autophagy defects, Tsukada and Ohsumi started the investigation of the molecular machinery underpinning autophagy.

9. Mizushima N A protein conjugation system essential for autophagy. Nature 395 , 395–398 (1998).9759731
10. Komatsu M Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration in mice. Nature 441 , 880–884 (2006).16625205
This landmark study, together with Hara et al. (2006), established that autophagy is essential for CNS physiology and that its dysfunction leads to degenerative changes.

11. Hara T Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. Nature 441 , 885–889 (2006).16625204
12. Yue Z A novel protein complex linking the delta 2 glutamate receptor and autophagy: implications for neurodegeneration in lurcher mice. Neuron 35 , 921–933 (2002).12372286
13. Komatsu M Essential role for autophagy protein Atg7 in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and the prevention of axonal degeneration. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104 , 14489–14494 (2007).17726112
14. Ahmed I Development and characterization of a new Parkinson’s disease model resulting from impaired autophagy. J. Neurosci 32 , 16503–16509 (2012).23152632
15. Friedman LG Disrupted autophagy leads to dopaminergic axon and dendrite degeneration and promotes presynaptic accumulation of α-synuclein and LRRK2 in the brain. J. Neurosci 32 , 7585–7593 (2012).22649237
16. Inoue K Coordinate regulation of mature dopaminergic axon morphology by macroautophagy and the PTEN Signaling pathway. PLoS Genet 9 , e1003845 (2013).24098148
17. Sato S Loss of autophagy in dopaminergic neurons causes Lewy pathology and motor dysfunction in aged mice. Sci. Rep 8 , 2813 (2018).29434298
18. Ohsumi Y Historical landmarks of autophagy research. Cell Res. 24 , 9–23 (2014).24366340
19. Parzych KR &amp; Klionsky DJ An overview of autophagy: morphology, mechanism, and regulation. Antioxid. Redox Signal 20 , 460–473 (2014).23725295
20. Schuck S Microautophagy — distinct molecular mechanisms handle cargoes of many sizes. J. Cell Sci 133 , jcs246322 (2020).32907930
21. Kaushik S &amp; Cuervo AM The coming of age of chaperone-mediated autophagy. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 19 , 365–381 (2018).29626215
22. Bourdenx M Chaperone-mediated autophagy prevents collapse of the neuronal metastable proteome. Cell 184 , 2696–2714.e25 (2021).33891876
23. Cuervo AM &amp; Wong E Chaperone-mediated autophagy: roles in disease and aging. Cell Res. 24 , 92–104 (2014).24281265
24. Dikic I &amp; Elazar Z Mechanism and medical implications of mammalian autophagy. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 19 , 349–364 (2018).29618831
25. Morishita H &amp; Mizushima N Diverse cellular roles of autophagy. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol 35 , 453–475 (2019).31283377
26. Nakatogawa H Mechanisms governing autophagosome biogenesis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 21 , 439–458 (2020).32372019
27. He C &amp; Klionsky DJ Regulation mechanisms and signaling pathways of autophagy. Annu. Rev. Genet 43 , 67–93 (2010).
28. Yamamoto A , Cremona ML &amp; Rothman JE Autophagy-mediated clearance of huntingtin aggregates triggered by the insulin-signaling pathway. J. Cell Biol 172 , 719–731 (2006).16505167
29. Lynch-Day MA &amp; Klionsky DJ The Cvt pathway as a model for selective autophagy. FEBS Lett 584 , 1359–1366 (2010).20146925
30. Zaffagnini G &amp; Martens S Mechanisms of selective autophagy. J. Mol. Biol 428 , 1714–1724 (2016).26876603
31. Turco E , Fracchiolla D &amp; Martens S Recruitment and activation of the ULK1/Atg1 kinase complex in selective autophagy. J. Mol. Biol 432 , 123–134 (2020).31351898
32. Schütter M , Giavalisco P , Brodesser S &amp; Graef M Local fatty acid channeling into phospholipid synthesis drives phagophore expansion during autophagy. Cell 180 , 135–149 (2020).31883797
33. Ghanbarpour A , Valverde DP , Melia TJ &amp; Reinisch KM A model for a partnership of lipid transfer proteins and scramblases in membrane expansion and organelle biogenesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 118 , e2101562118 (2021).33850023
34. Zhen Y ESCRT-mediated phagophore sealing during mitophagy. Autophagy 16 , 826–841 (2019).31366282
35. Takahashi Y An autophagy assay reveals the ESCRT-III component CHMP2A as a regulator of phagophore closure. Nat. Commun 9 , 2855 (2018).30030437
36. Itakura E , Kishi-Itakura C &amp; Mizushima N The hairpin-type tail-anchored SNARE syntaxin 17 targets to autophagosomes for fusion with endosomes/lysosomes. Cell 151 , 1256–1269 (2012).23217709
37. Aplin A , Jasionowski T , Tuttle DL , Lenk SE &amp; Dunn WAJ Cytoskeletal elements are required for the formation and maturation of autophagic vacuoles. J. Cell Physiol 152 , 458–466 (1992).1506410
38. Kabeya Y LC3, a mammalian homologue of yeast Apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after processing. EMBO J 19 , 5720–5728 (2000).11060023
39. Mizushima N , Yamamoto A , Matsui M , Yoshimori T &amp; Ohsumi Y In vivo analysis of autophagy in response to nutrient starvation using transgenic mice expressing a fluorescent autophagosome marker. Mol. Biol. Cell 15 , 1101–1111 (2004).14699058
This study created a mouse with fluorescently tagged LC3, a critical step in tool development to understand autophagic function in vivo.

40. Nath S Lipidation of the LC3/GABARAP family of autophagy proteins relies on a membrane-curvature-sensing domain in Atg3. Nat. Cell Biol 16 , 415–424 (2014).24747438
41. Nguyen TN Atg8 family LC3/GABARAP proteins are crucial for autophagosome-lysosome fusion but not autophagosome formation during PINK1/Parkin mitophagy and starvation. J. Cell Biol 215 , 857–874 (2016).27864321
42. Weidberg H LC3 and GATE-16 N termini mediate membrane fusion processes required for autophagosome biogenesis. Dev. Cell 20 , 444–454 (2011).21497758
43. Wang H , Bedford FK , Brandon NJ , Moss SJ &amp; Olsen RW GABA(A)-receptor-associated protein links GABA(A) receptors and the cytoskeleton. Nature 397 , 69–72 (1999).9892355
44. Klionsky DJ , Cueva R &amp; Yaver DS Aminopeptidase I of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is localized to the vacuole independent of the secretory pathway. J. Cell Biol 119 , 287–299 (1992).1400574
45. Rogov V , Dotsch V , Johansen T &amp; Kirkin V Interactions between autophagy receptors and ubiquitin-like proteins form the molecular basis for selective autophagy. Mol. Cell 53 , 167–178 (2014).24462201
46. Gubas A &amp; Dikic I A guide to the regulation of selective autophagy receptors. FEBS J 289 , 75–89 (2021).33730405
47. Kirkin V &amp; Rogov VV A diversity of selective autophagy receptors determines the specificity of the autophagy pathway. Mol. Cell 76 , 268–285 (2019).31585693
48. Stolz A , Ernst A &amp; Dikic I Cargo recognition and trafficking in selective autophagy. Nat. Cell Biol 16 , 495–501 (2014).24875736
49. Kim BW , Kwon DH &amp; Song HK Structure biology of selective autophagy receptors. BMB Rep 49 , 73–80 (2016).26698872
50. Khaminets A , Behl C &amp; Dikic I Ubiquitin-dependent and independent signals in selective autophagy. Trends Cell Biol 26 , 6–16 (2016).26437584
51. Bjørkøy G p62/SQSTM1 forms protein aggregates degraded by autophagy and has a protective effect on huntingtin-induced cell death. J. Cell Biol 171 , 603–614 (2005).16286508
52. Palikaras K , Lionaki E &amp; Tavernarakis N Mechanisms of mitophagy in cellular homeostasis, physiology and pathology. Nat. Cell Biol 20 , 1013–1022 (2018).30154567
53. Nthiga TM Regulation of Golgi turnover by CALCOCO1-mediated selective autophagy. J. Cell Biol 220 , e202006128(2021).33871553
54. Yamamoto A Go for the Golgi: eating selectively with Calcoco1. J. Cell Biol 220 , e202105005 (2021).33999115
55. Narendra D , Kane LA , Hauser DN , Fearnley IM &amp; Youle RJ p62/SQSTM1 is required for Parkin-induced mitochondrial clustering but not mitophagy; VDAC1 is dispensable for both. Autophagy 6 , 1090–1106 (2010).20890124
56. Komatsu M Homeostatic levels of p62 control cytoplasmic inclusion body formation in autophagy-deficient mice. Cell 131 , 1149–1163 (2007).18083104
This study separated autophagy disruption from the development of inclusion bodies, indicating that the regulation of neuronal health by autophagy goes beyond proteostasis alone.

57. Kurashige T Optineurin defects cause TDP43-pathology with autophagic vacuolar formation. Neurobiol. Dis 148 , 105215 (2021).33296728
58. Fox LM Huntington’s disease pathogenesis is modified in vivo by Alfy/Wdfy3 and selective macroautophagy. Neuron 105 , 813–821 (2020).31899071
Investigating the role of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative pathogenesis, this study found that the autophagy adaptor Alfy confers resistance to HD-like phenotypes.

59. Filimonenko M The selective macroautophagic degradation of aggregated proteins requires the PI3P-binding protein Alfy. Mol. Cell 38 , 265–279 (2010).20417604
60. Dhingra A , Alexander D , Reyes-Reveles J , Sharp R &amp; Boesze-Battaglia K Microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3) isoforms in RPE and retina. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol 1074 , 609–616 (2018).29721994
61. Komatsu M Impairment of starvation-induced and constitutive autophagy in Atg7-deficient mice. J. Cell Biol 169 , 425–434 (2005).15866887
62. Maday S &amp; Holzbaur ELF Compartment-specific regulation of autophagy in primary neurons. J. Neurosci 36 , 5933–5945 (2016).27251616
63. Kaushik S Autophagy in hypothalamic AgRP neurons regulates food intake and energy balance. Cell Metab. 14 , 173–183 (2011).21803288
64. Nikoletopoulou V , Sidiropoulou K , Kallergi E , Dalezios Y &amp; Tavernarakis N Modulation of autophagy by BDNF underlies synaptic plasticity. Cell Metab. 26 , 230–242.e5 (2017).28683289
65. Tsvetkov AS A small-molecule scaffold induces autophagy in primary neurons and protects against toxicity in a Huntington disease model. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 , 16982–16987 (2010).20833817
66. Maday S &amp; Holzbaur ELF Autophagosome biogenesis in primary neurons follows an ordered and spatially regulated pathway. Dev. Cell 30 , 71–85 (2014).25026034
This significant study described neuronal compartmentalization of autophagosome biogenesis, maturation and fusion to the lysosome.

67. Hernandez D Regulation of presynaptic neurotransmission by macroautophagy. Neuron 74 , 277–284 (2012).22542182
This study, focusing on dopaminergic neurons, established that autophagy modulates presynaptic structure and function.

68. Tang G Loss of mTOR-dependent macroautophagy causes autistic-like synaptic pruning deficits. Neuron 83 , 1131–1143 (2014).25155956
69. Lieberman OJ mTOR suppresses macroautophagy during striatal postnatal development and is hyperactive in mouse models of autism spectrum disorders. Front. Cell Neurosci 14 , 70 (2020).32296308
70. Khobrekar NV , Quintremil S , Dantas TJ &amp; Vallee RB The Dynein adaptor RILP controls neuronal autophagosome biogenesis, transport, and clearance. Dev. Cell 53 , 141–153 (2020).32275887
71. Yamamoto A &amp; Yue Z Autophagy and its normal and pathogenic states in the brain. Annu. Rev. Neurosci 37 , 55–78 (2014).24821313
72. Zhong Y Distinct regulation of autophagic activity by Atg14L and Rubicon associated with Beclin 1-phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase complex. Nat. Cell Biol 11 , 468–476 (2009).19270693
Together with Matsunaga et al. (2009), this study provided critical insight into the molecular regulation of autophagy versus other membrane fates by upstream lipid kinase complexes.

73. Tooze SA &amp; Yoshimori T The origin of the autophagosomal membrane. Nat. Cell Biol 12 , 831–835 (2010).20811355
74. Itakura E , Kishi C , Inoue K &amp; Mizushima N Beclin 1 forms two distinct phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complexes with mammalian Atg14 and UVRAG. Mol. Biol. Cell 19 , 5360–5372 (2008).18843052
75. Matsunaga K Two Beclin 1-binding proteins, Atg14L and Rubicon, reciprocally regulate autophagy at different stages. Nat. Cell Biol 11 , 385–396 (2009).19270696
76. Lee S , Sato Y &amp; Nixon RA Lysosomal proteolysis inhibition selectively disrupts axonal transport of degradative organelles and causes an Alzheimer’s-like axonal dystrophy. J. Neurosci 31 , 7817–7830 (2011).21613495
77. Maday S , Wallace KE &amp; Holzbaur ELF Autophagosomes initiate distally and mature during transport toward the cell soma in primary neurons. J. Cell Biol 196 , 407–417 (2012).22331844
78. Cheng XT , Zhou B , Lin MY , Cai Q &amp; Sheng ZH Axonal autophagosomes recruit dynein for retrograde transport through fusion with late endosomes. J. Cell Biol 209 , 377–386 (2015).25940348
79. Shehata M , Matsumura H , Okubo-Suzuki R , Ohkawa N &amp; Inokuchi K Neuronal stimulation induces autophagy in hippocampal neurons that is involved in AMPA receptor degradation after chemical long-term depression. J. Neurosci 32 , 10413–10422 (2012).22836274
80. Di Malta C , Fryer JD , Settembre C &amp; Ballabio A Astrocyte dysfunction triggers neurodegeneration in a lysosomal storage disorder. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109 , 2334–2342 (2012).
81. Bankston AN Autophagy is essential for oligodendrocyte differentiation, survival, and proper myelination. Glia 67 , 1745–1759 (2019).31162728
82. Okerlund ND Bassoon controls presynaptic autophagy through Atg5. Neuron 93 , 897–913 (2017).28231469
83. Hoffmann-Conaway S Parkin contributes to synaptic vesicle autophagy in Bassoon-deficient mice. eLife 9 , e56590 (2020).32364493
84. Vijayan V &amp; Verstreken P Autophagy in the presynaptic compartment in health and disease. J. Cell Biol 216 , 1895–1906 (2017).28515275
85. Sumitomo A Ulk2 controls cortical excitatory–inhibitory balance via autophagic regulation of p62 and GABAA receptor trafficking in pyramidal neurons. Hum. Mol. Genet 27 , 3165–3176 (2018).29893844
86. Nikoletopoulou V &amp; Tavernarakis N Regulation and roles of autophagy at synapses. Trends Cell Biol 28 , 646–661 (2018).29731196
87. Glatigny M Autophagy is required for memory formation and reverses age-related memory decline. Curr. Biol 29 , 435–448 (2019).30661803
88. Shen H , Zhu H , Panja D , Gu Q &amp; Li Z Autophagy controls the induction and developmental decline of NMDAR-LTD through endocytic recycling. Nat. Commun 11 , 2979 (2020).32532981
89. Compans B NMDAR-dependent long-term depression is associated with increased short term plasticity through autophagy mediated loss of PSD-95. Nat. Commun 12 , 2849 (2021).33990590
90. Pan Y Neuronal activity recruits the CRTC1/CREB axis to drive transcription-dependent autophagy for maintaining late-phase LTD. Cell Rep. 36 , 109398 (2021).34289350
91. Birdsall V &amp; Waites CL Autophagy at the synapse. Neurosci. Lett 697 , 24–28 (2019).29802916
92. Soukup SF A LRRK2-dependent endophilina phosphoswitch is critical for macroautophagy at presynaptic terminals. Neuron 92 , 829–844 (2016).27720484
93. Vanhauwaert R The SAC1 domain in synaptojanin is required for autophagosome maturation at presynaptic terminals. EMBO J 36 , 1392–1411 (2017).28331029
94. Lieberman OJ Cell-type-specific regulation of neuronal intrinsic excitability by macroautophagy. eLife 9 , e50843 (2020).31913125
95. Hirabayashi Y ER-mitochondria tethering by PDZD8 regulates Ca2+ dynamics in mammalian neurons. Science 358 , 623–630 (2017).29097544
96. Kuijpers M Neuronal autophagy regulates presynaptic neurotransmission by controlling the axonal endoplasmic reticulum. Neuron 109 , 299–313.e9 (2021).33157003
This study linked ER-phagy to neurotransmission through the control of calcium stores in the ER.

97. Rudnick ND Distinct roles for motor neuron autophagy early and late in the SOD1 G93A mouse model of ALS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 114 , E8294–E8303 (2017).28904095
98. Nishiyama J , Miura E , Mizushima N , Watanabe M &amp; Yuzaki M Aberrant membranes and double-membrane structures accumulate in the axons of Atg5-null Purkinje cells before neuronal death. Autophagy 3 , 591–596 (2007).17912025
99. Tang G , Yue Z , Tallóczy Z &amp; Goldman JE Adaptive autophagy in Alexander disease-affected astrocytes. Autophagy 4 , 701–703 (2008).
100. Manzoni C mTOR independent regulation of macroautophagy by leucine rich repeat kinase 2 via Beclin-1. Sci. Rep 6 , 35106 (2016).27731364
101. Ulland TK TREM2 maintains microglial metabolic fitness in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 170 , 649–663 (2017).28802038
102. Jänen SB , Chaachouay H &amp; Richter-Landsberg C Autophagy is activated by proteasomal inhibition and involved in aggresome clearance in cultured astrocytes. Glia 58 , 1766–1774 (2010).20645412
103. Schwarz L , Goldbaum O , Bergmann M , Probst-Cousin S &amp; Richter-Landsberg C Involvement of macroautophagy in multiple system atrophy and protein aggregate formation in oligodendrocytes. J. Mol. Neurosci 47 , 256–266 (2012).22411133
104. Cho MH Autophagy in microglia degrades extracellular β-amyloid fibrils and regulates the NLRP3 inflammasome. Autophagy 10 , 1761–1775 (2014).25126727
105. Choi I Microglia clear neuron-released α-synuclein via selective autophagy and prevent neurodegeneration. Nat. Commun 11 , 1386 (2020).32170061
106. Motori E Inflammation-induced alteration of astrocyte mitochondrial dynamics requires autophagy for mitochondrial network maintenance. Cell Metab. 18 , 844–859 (2013).24315370
107. Sheng R Autophagy activation is associated with neuroprotection in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemic preconditioning. Autophagy 6 , 482–494 (2010).20400854
108. Ni Y RIP1K contributes to neuronal and astrocytic cell death in ischemic stroke via activating autophagic-lysosomal pathway. Neuroscience 371 , 60–74 (2018).29102662
109. Ohri SS Blocking autophagy in oligodendrocytes limits functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci 38 , 5900–5912 (2018).29793971
110. Sun LO Spatiotemporal control of CNS myelination by oligodendrocyte programmed cell death through the TFEB-PUMA axis. Cell 175 , 1811–1826 (2018).30503207
111. Smith CM , Mayer JA &amp; Duncan ID Autophagy promotes oligodendrocyte survival and function following dysmyelination in a long-lived myelin mutant. J. Neurosci 33 , 8088–8100 (2013).23637198
112. Lebrun-Julien F Balanced mTORC1 activity in oligodendrocytes is required for accurate CNS myelination. J. Neurosci 34 , 8432–8448 (2014).24948799
113. Kim HJ Deficient autophagy in microglia impairs synaptic pruning and causes social behavioral defects. Mol. Psychiatry 22 , 1576–1584 (2017).27400854
114. Lucin KM Microglial beclin 1 regulates retromer trafficking and phagocytosis and is impaired in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron 79 , 873–886 (2013).24012002
115. Shibuya Y , Chang CC , Huang LH , Bryleva EY &amp; Chang TY Inhibiting ACAT1/SOAT1 in microglia stimulates autophagy-mediated lysosomal proteolysis and increases Aβ1–42 clearance. J. Neurosci 34 , 14484–14501 (2014).25339759
116. Wang Y TREM2 lipid sensing sustains the microglial response in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Cell 160 , 1061–1071 (2015).25728668
117. Heckmann BL LC3-associated endocytosis facilitates β-amyloid clearance and mitigates neurodegeneration in murine Alzheimer’s disease. Cell 178 , 536–551 (2019).31257024
This work identified an endocytic pathway involving a subset of autophagy machinery (LANDO) in microglia, emphasizing the need to consider non-autophagic functions of such machinery in the study and interpretation of CNS autophagy.

118. Iadecola C The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey through neurovascular coupling in health and disease. Neuron 96 , 17–42 (2017).28957666
119. Wang X An updated review of autophagy in ischemic stroke: from mechanisms to therapies. Exp. Neurol 340 , 113684 (2021).33676918
120. Yang Z Autophagy protects the blood-brain barrier through regulating the dynamic of claudin-5 in short-term starvation. Front. Physiol 10 , 2 (2019).30713499
121. Zhang X Autophagy induced by oxygen-glucose deprivation mediates the injury to the neurovascular unit. Med. Sci. Monit 25 , 1373–1382 (2019).30787267
122. Kortekaas R Blood–brain barrier dysfunction in parkinsonian midbrain in vivo. Ann. Neurol 57 , 176–179 (2005).15668963
123. Sweeney MD , Ayyadurai S &amp; Zlokovic BV Pericytes of the neurovascular unit: key functions and signaling pathways. Nat. Neurosci 19 , 771–783 (2016).27227366
124. Muoio V , Persson PB &amp; Sendeski MM The neurovascular unit–concept review. Acta Physiol. 210 , 790–798 (2014).
125. Kim M Mutation in ATG5 reduces autophagy and leads to ataxia with developmental delay. eLife 5 , e12245 (2016).26812546
126. Xu J A variant of the autophagy-related 5 gene is associated with child cerebral palsy. Front. Cell Neurosci 11 , 407 (2017).29326554
127. Hentges KE FRAP/mTOR is required for proliferation and patterning during embryonic development in the mouse. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98 , 13796–13801 (2001).11707573
128. Hoeffer CA Removal of FKBP12 enhances mTOR-Raptor interactions, LTP, memory, and perseverative/repetitive behavior. Neuron 60 , 832–845 (2008).19081378
129. Collier JJ Developmental consequences of defective ATG7-mediated autophagy in humans. N. Engl. J. Med 384 , 2406–2417 (2021).34161705
130. Lv X The crucial role of Atg5 in cortical neurogenesis during early brain development. Sci. Rep 4 , 6010 (2014).25109817
131. Wang B The autophagy-inducing kinases, ULK1 and ULK2, regulate axon guidance in the developing mouse forebrain via a noncanonical pathway. Autophagy 14 , 796–811 (2014).
132. Dragich JM Autophagy linked FYVE (Alfy/WDFY3) is required for establishing neuronal connectivity in the mammalian brain. eLife 5 , e14810 (2016).27648578
133. Orosco LA Loss of Wdfy3 in mice alters cerebral cortical neurogenesis reflecting aspects of the autism pathology. Nat. Commun 5 , 4692 (2014).25198012
134. Coupé B Loss of autophagy in pro-opiomelanocortin neurons perturbs axon growth and causes metabolic dysregulation. Cell Metab. 15 , 247–255 (2012).22285542
135. Joo JH The noncanonical role of ULK/ATG1 in ER-to-Golgi trafficking is essential for cellular homeostasis. Mol. Cell 62 , 491–506 (2016).27203176
136. Lieberman OJ , McGuirt AF , Tang G &amp; Sulzer D Roles for neuronal and glial autophagy in synaptic pruning during development. Neurobiol. Dis 122 , 49–63 (2019).29709573
137. Hill SE &amp; Colón-Ramos DA The journey of the synaptic autophagosome: a cell biological perspective. Neuron 105 , 961–973 (2020).32191859
138. Marsh D &amp; Dragich JM Autophagy in mammalian neurodevelopment and implications for childhood neurological disorders. Neurosci. Lett 697 , 29–33 (2019).29665429
139. Yan J , Porch MW , Court-Vazquez B , Bennett MVL &amp; Zukin RS Activation of autophagy rescues synaptic and cognitive deficits in fragile X mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115 , E9707–E9716 (2018).30242133
140. Cullup T Recessive mutations in EPG5 cause Vici syndrome, a multisystem disorder with defective autophagy. Nat. Genet 45 , 83–87 (2013).23222957
141. Byrne S EPG5-related Vici syndrome: a paradigm of neurodevelopmental disorders with defective autophagy. Brain 139 , 765–781 (2016).26917586
142. Zhao YG , Zhao H , Sun H &amp; Zhang H Role of Epg5 in selective neurodegeneration and Vici syndrome. Autophagy 9 , 1258–1262 (2013).23674064
143. Wang Z The vici syndrome protein EPG5 Is a Rab7 effector that determines the fusion specificity of autophagosomes with late endosomes/lysosomes. Mol. Cell 63 , 781–795 (2016).27588602
144. Haack TB Exome sequencing reveals de novo WDR45 mutations causing a phenotypically distinct, X-linked dominant form of NBIA. Am. J. Hum. Genet 91 , 1144–1149 (2012).23176820
145. Saitsu H De novo mutations in the autophagy gene WDR45 cause static encephalopathy of childhood with neurodegeneration in adulthood. Nat. Genet 45 , 445–459 (2013).23435086
146. Polson HE Mammalian Atg18 (WIPI2) localizes to omegasome-anchored phagophores and positively regulates LC3 lipidation. Autophagy 6 , 506–522 (2010).20505359
147. Thomas AC Mutations in SNX14 cause a distinctive autosomal-recessive cerebellar ataxia and intellectual disability syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet 95 , 611–621 (2014).25439728
148. Akizu N Biallelic mutations in SNX14 cause a syndromic form of cerebellar atrophy and lysosome-autophagosome dysfunction. Nat. Genet 47 , 528–534 (2015).25848753
149. Ebrahimi-Fakhari D Congenital disorders of autophagy: an emerging novel class of inborn errors of neuro-metabolism. Brain 139 , 317–337 (2016).26715604
150. Renvoisé B Lysosomal abnormalities in hereditary spastic paraplegia types SPG15 and SPG11. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol 1 , 379–389 (2014).24999486
151. Gstrein T Mutations in Vps15 perturb neuronal migration in mice and are associated with neurodevelopmental disease in humans. Nat. Neurosci 21 , 207–217 (2018).29311744
152. Taylor JP , Hardy J &amp; Fischbeck KH Toxic proteins in neurodegenerative disease. Science 296 , 1991–1995 (2002).12065827
153. Lattante S , Rouleau GA &amp; Kabashi E TARDBP and FUS mutations associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: summary and update. Hum. Mutat 34 , 812–826 (2018).
154. Deng Z Autophagy receptors and neurodegenerative diseases. Trends Cell Biol 27 , 491–504 (2017).28169082
155. Fecto F SQSTM1 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch. Neurol 68 , 1440–1446 (2011).22084127
156. Teyssou E Mutations in SQSTM1 encoding p62 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: genetics and neuropathology. Acta Neuropathol 125 , 511–522 (2013).23417734
157. Maruyama H Mutations of optineurin in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 465 , 223–226 (2010).20428114
This work showed that mutations in the adaptor protein OPTN can cause ALS and, in cell-based studies of the mutations, demonstrated defects in proteostasis and inflammation.

158. Cirulli ET Exome sequencing in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis identifies risk genes and pathways. Science 347 , 1436–1441 (2015).25700176
159. Richter B Phosphorylation of OPTN by TBK1 enhances its binding to Ub chains and promotes selective autophagy of damaged mitochondria. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113 , 4039–4044 (2016).27035970
160. Fitzgerald KA IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. Nat. Immunol 4 , 491–496 (2003).12692549
161. West AP , Shadel GS &amp; Ghosh S Mitochondria in innate immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol 11 , 389–402 (2011).21597473
162. Brenner D Heterozygous Tbk1 loss has opposing effects in early and late stages of ALS in mice. J. Exp. Med 216 , 267–278 (2019).30635357
163. Gerbino V The Loss of TBK1 kinase activity in motor neurons or in all cell types differentially impacts ALS disease progression in SOD1 mice. Neuron 106 , 789–805 (2020).32220666
164. Renton AE A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron 72 , 257–268 (2011).21944779
165. DeJesus-Hernandez M Expanded GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in noncoding region of C9ORF72 causes chromosome 9p-linked FTD and ALS. Neuron 72 , 245–256 (2011).21944778
166. Webster CP The C9orf72 protein interacts with Rab1a and the ULK1 complex to regulate initiation of autophagy. EMBO J 35 , 1656–1676 (2016).27334615
167. Farg MA C9ORF72, implicated in amytrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia, regulates endosomal trafficking. Hum. Mol. Genet 23 , 3579–3595 (2017).
168. Boivin M Reduced autophagy upon C9ORF72 loss synergizes with dipeptide repeat protein toxicity in G4C2 repeat expansion disorders. EMBO J 39 , e100574 (2020).31930538
169. Zhu Q Reduced C9ORF72 function exacerbates gain of toxicity from ALS/FTD-causing repeat expansion in C9orf72. Nat. Neurosci 23 , 615–624 (2020).32284607
170. Sreedharan J TDP-43 mutations in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 319 , 1668–1672 (2008).18309045
171. Van Deerlin VM TARDBP mutations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with TDP-43 neuropathology: a genetic and histopathological analysis. Lancet Neurol 7 , 409–416 (2008).18396105
172. Borroni B Mutation within TARDBP leads to frontotemporal dementia without motor neuron disease. Hum. Mutat 30 , E974–E983 (2009).19655382
173. Mackenzie IR &amp; Rademakers R The role of transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia. Curr. Opin. Neurol 21 , 693–700 (2008).18989115
174. Johnson BS TDP-43 is intrinsically aggregation-prone, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked mutations accelerate aggregation and increase toxicity. J. Biol. Chem 284 , 20329–20339 (2009).19465477
175. Scotter EL Differential roles of the ubiquitin proteasome system and autophagy in the clearance of soluble and aggregated TDP-43 species. J. Cell Sci 127 , 1263–1278 (2014).24424030
176. Barmada SJ Autophagy induction enhances TDP43 turnover and survival in neuronal ALS models. Nat. Chem. Biol 10 , 677–685 (2014).24974230
177. Bose JK , Huang CC &amp; Shen CK Regulation of autophagy by neuropathological protein TDP-43. J. Biol. Chem 286 , 44441–44448 (2011).22052911
178. Xia Q TDP-43 loss of function increases TFEB activity and blocks autophagosome-lysosome fusion. EMBO J 35 , 121–142 (2016).26702100
179. Ling JP , Pletnikova O , Troncoso JC &amp; Wong PC TDP-43 repression of nonconserved cryptic exons is compromised in ALS-FTD. Science 349 , 650–655 (2015).26250685
180. Hou X , Watzlawik JO , Fiesel FC &amp; Springer W Autophagy in Parkinson’s disease. J. Mol. Biol 432 , 2651–2672 (2020).32061929
181. Polymeropoulos MH Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson’s disease. Science 276 , 2045–2047 (1997).9197268
182. Singleton AB alpha-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science 302 , 841 (2003).14593171
183. Abeliovich A &amp; Gitler AD Defects in trafficking bridge Parkinson’s disease pathology and genetics. Nature 539 , 207–216 (2016).27830778
184. Singh PK &amp; Muqit MMK Parkinson’s: a disease of aberrant vesicle trafficking. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol 36 , 237–264 (2020).32749865
185. Stojkovska I Rescue of α-synuclein aggregation in Parkinson’s patient neurons by synergistic enhancement of ER proteostasis and protein trafficking. Neuron 110 , 436–451.e11 (2022).34793693
186. Pihlstrøm L A comprehensive analysis of SNCA-related genetic risk in sporadic Parkinson disease. Ann. Neurol 84 , 117–129 (2018).30146727
187. Spillantini MG Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature 388 , 839–840 (1997).9278044
188. Kitada T Mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. Nature 392 , 605–608 (1998).9560156
189. Valente EM Localization of a novel locus for autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism, PARK6, on human chromosome 1p35-p36. Am. J. Hum. Genet 68 , 895–900 (2001).11254447
190. Geisler S The PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy is compromised by PD-associated mutations. Autophagy 6 , 871–878 (2010).20798600
191. Lazarou M The ubiquitin kinase PINK1 recruits autophagy receptors to induce mitophagy. Nature 524 , 309–314 (2015).26266977
This study mechanistically characterized the role of PD-associated PINK1 in mitophagy.

192. Pickrell AM &amp; Youle RJ The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 85 , 257–273 (2015).25611507
193. Goldberg MS Parkin-deficient mice exhibit nigrostriatal deficits but not loss of dopaminergic neurons. J. Biol. Chem 278 , 43628–43635 (2003).12930822
194. Perez FA &amp; Palmiter RD Parkin-deficient mice are not a robust model of parkinsonism. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102 , 2174–2179 (2005).15684050
195. Matheoud D Intestinal infection triggers Parkinson’s disease-like symptoms in Pink1−/− mice. Nature 571 , 565–569 (2019).31316206
196. Sliter DA Parkin and PINK1 mitigate STING-induced inflammation. Nature 561 , 258–262 (2018).30135585
197. Lie PPY &amp; Nixon RA Lysosome trafficking and signaling in health and neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiol. Dis 122 , 94–105 (2019).29859318
198. Van Acker ZP , Bretou M &amp; Annaert W Endo-lysosomal dysregulations and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease: impact of genetic risk factors. Mol. Neurodegener 14 , 20 (2019).31159836
199. Cataldo AM , Hamilton DJ , Barnett JL , Paskevich PA &amp; Nixon RA Properties of the endosomal-lysosomal system in the human central nervous system: disturbances mark most neurons in populations at risk to degenerate in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 16 , 186–199 (1996).8613784
200. Nixon RA Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer disease: an immuno-electron microscopy study. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol 64 , 113–122 (2005).15751225
This ultrastructural study in cortices from patients provided key evidence of autophagy dysfunction in AD.

201. Boland B Autophagy induction and autophagosome clearance in neurons: relationship to autophagic pathology in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci 28 , 6926–6937 (2008).18596167
202. Bloom GS Amyloid-β and tau: the trigger and bullet in Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. JAMA Neurol. 71 , 505–508 (2014).24493463
203. Nilsson P Aβ secretion and plaque formation depend on autophagy. Cell Rep. 5 , 61–69 (2013).24095740
204. Inoue K Macroautophagy deficiency mediates age-dependent neurodegeneration through a phospho-tau pathway. Mol. Neurodegener 7 , 48 (2012).22998728
205. Croce KR &amp; Yamamoto A Dissolving the complex role aggregation plays in neurodegenerative disease. Mov. Disord 36 , 1061–1069 (2021).33755257
206. Fimia GM Ambra1 regulates autophagy and development of the nervous system. Nature 447 , 1121–1125 (2007).17589504
207. Kuma A The role of autophagy during the early neonatal starvation period. Nature 432 , 1032–1036 (2004).15525940
208. Qu X Autophagy gene-dependent clearance of apoptotic cells during embryonic development. Cell 128 , 931–946 (2007).17350577
209. Yue Z , Jin S , Yang C , Levine AJ &amp; Heintz N Beclin 1, an autophagy gene essential for early embryonic development, is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100 , 15077–15082 (2003).14657337
210. Kaushik S Loss of autophagy in hypothalamic POMC neurons impairs lipolysis. EMBO Rep. 13 , 258–265 (2012).22249165
211. Liang CC , Wang C , Peng X , Gan B &amp; Guan JL Neural-specific deletion of FIP200 leads to cerebellar degeneration caused by increased neuronal death and axon degeneration. J. Biol. Chem 285 , 3499–3509 (2010).19940130
212. Kurth I Mutations in FAM134B, encoding a newly identified Golgi protein, cause severe sensory and autonomic neuropathy. Nat. Genet 41 , 1179–1181 (2009).19838196
213. Khaminets A Regulation of endoplasmic reticulum turnover by selective autophagy. Nature 522 , 354–358 (2015).26040720
214. Oliveras-Salvá M , Van Rompuy AS , Heeman B , Van den Haute C &amp; Baekelandt V Loss-of-function rodent models for parkin and PINK1. J. Parkinsons Dis 1 , 229–251 (2011).23939304
215. Matsumoto G , Wada K , Okuno M , Kurosawa M &amp; Nukina N Serine 403 phosphorylation of p62/SQSTM1 regulates selective autophagic clearance of ubiquitinated proteins. Mol. Cell 44 , 279–289 (2011).22017874
216. Rea SL , Majcher V , Searle MS &amp; Layfield R SQSTM1 mutations — bridging Paget disease of bone and ALS/FTLD. Exp. Cell Res 325 , 27–37 (2014).24486447
217. Cuyvers E Genetic variability in SQSTM1 and risk of early-onset Alzheimer dementia: a European early-onset dementia consortium study. Neurobiol. Aging 36 , 2005.e15–2005.e22 (2015).
218. Komatsu M , Kageyama S &amp; Ichimura Y p62/SQSTM1/A170: physiology and pathology. Pharmacol. Res 66 , 457–462 (2012).22841931
219. Moscat J &amp; Diaz-Meco MT p62 at the crossroads of autophagy, apoptosis, and cancer. Cell 137 , 1001–1004 (2009).19524504
220. Moscat J , Karin M &amp; Diaz-Meco MT p62 in cancer: signaling adaptor beyond autophagy. Cell 167 , 606–609 (2016).27768885
221. Padman BS LC3/GABARAPs drive ubiquitin-independent recruitment of Optineurin and NDP52 to amplify mitophagy. Nat. Commun 10 , 408 (2019).30679426
222. Heo JM , Ordureau A , Paulo JA , Rinehart J &amp; Harper JW The PINK1-PARKIN mitochondrial ubiquitylation pathway drives a program of OPTN/NDP52 recruitment and TBK1 activation to promote mitophagy. Mol. Cell 60 , 7–20 (2015).26365381
223. Schwab C , Yu S , McGeer EG &amp; McGeer PL Optineurin in Huntington’s disease intranuclear inclusions. Neurosci. Lett 506 , 149–154 (2012).22085693
224. Mankouri J Optineurin negatively regulates the induction of IFNbeta in response to RNA virus infection. PLoS Pathog. 6 , e1000778 (2010).20174559
225. Outlioua A , Pourcelot M &amp; Arnoult D The role of optineurin in antiviral type I interferon production. Front. Immunol 9 , 853 (2018).29755463
226. Odagiri S Autophagic adapter protein NBR1 is localized in Lewy bodies and glial cytoplasmic inclusions and is involved in aggregate formation in α-synucleinopathy. Acta Neuropathol. 124 , 173–186 (2012).22484440
227. Rué L Brain region- and age-dependent dysregulation of p62 and NBR1 in a mouse model of Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis 52 , 219–228 (2013).23295856
228. Stessman HA Targeted sequencing identifies 91 neurodevelopmental-disorder risk genes with autism and developmental-disability biases. Nat. Genet 49 , 515–526 (2017).28191889
229. Iossifov I The contribution of de novo coding mutations to autism spectrum disorder. Nature 515 , 216–221 (2014).25363768
230. Clausen TH p62/SQSTM1 and ALFY interact to facilitate the formation of p62 bodies/ALIS and their degradation by autophagy. Autophagy 6 , 330–344 (2010).20168092
231. Kim S NDP52 associates with phosphorylated tau in brains of an Alzheimer disease mouse model. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun 454 , 196–201 (2014).25450380
232. Fan S The role of autophagy and autophagy receptor NDP52 in microbial infections. Int. J. Mol. Sci 21 , 2008 (2020).
233. Till A Autophagy receptor CALCOCO2/NDP52 takes center stage in Crohn disease. Autophagy 9 , 1256–1257 (2013).23820297
234. Jin S &amp; Cui J BST2 inhibits type I IFN (interferon) signaling by accelerating MAVS degradation through CALCOCO2-directed autophagy. Autophagy 14 , 171–172 (2018).29165031
235. Sabaie H , Ahangar NK , Ghafouri-Fard S , Taheri M &amp; Rezazadeh M Clinical and genetic features of PEHO and PEHO-Like syndromes: a scoping review. Biomed. Pharmacother 131 , 110793 (2020).33152950
236. Wyant GA NUFIP1 is a ribosome receptor for starvation-induced ribophagy. Science 360 , 751–758 (2018).29700228
237. Bardoni B NUFIP1 (nuclear FMRP interacting protein 1) is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein associated with active synaptoneurosomes. Exp. Cell Res 289 , 95–107 (2003).12941608
238. Chen Q ATL3 is a tubular ER-phagy receptor for GABARAP-mediated selective autophagy. Curr. Biol 29 , 846–855.e6 (2019).30773365
239. Kornak U Sensory neuropathy with bone destruction due to a mutation in the membrane-shaping atlastin GTPase 3. Brain 137 , 683–692 (2014).24459106
240. Neufeldt CJ ER-shaping atlastin proteins act as central hubs to promote flavivirus replication and virion assembly. Nat. Microbiol 4 , 2416–2429 (2019).31636417
241. Zou Y Identification of rare RTN3 variants in Alzheimer’s disease in Han Chinese. Hum. Genet 137 , 141–150 (2018).29356939
242. Murayama KS Reticulons RTN3 and RTN4-B/C interact with BACE1 and inhibit its ability to produce amyloid beta-protein. Eur. J. Neurosci 24 , 1237–1244 (2006).16965550
243. Kuang E ER Ca2+ depletion triggers apoptotic signals for endoplasmic reticulum (ER) overload response induced by overexpressed reticulon 3 (RTN3/HAP). J. Cell Physiol 204 , 549–559 (2005).15799019
244. Tang BL &amp; Liou YC Novel modulators of amyloid-beta precursor protein processing. J. Neurochem 100 , 314–323 (2007).17241154
245. Mo J , Chen J &amp; Zhang B Critical roles of FAM134B in ER-phagy and diseases. Cell Death Dis. 11 , 983 (2020).33199694
246. Chiramel AI , Dougherty JD , Nair V , Robertson SJ &amp; Best SM FAM134B, the selective autophagy receptor for endoplasmic reticulum turnover, inhibits replication of ebola virus strains makona and mayinga. J. Infect. Dis 214 (Suppl. 3 ), S319–S325 (2016).27511895
247. Farré JC &amp; Subramani S Mechanistic insights into selective autophagy pathways: lessons from yeast. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 17 , 537–552 (2016).27381245
248. Chu CT Cardiolipin externalization to the outer mitochondrial membrane acts as an elimination signal for mitophagy in neuronal cells. Nat. Cell Biol 15 , 1197–1205 (2013).24036476
249. Wilkinson S Emerging principles of selective ER autophagy. J. Mol. Biol 432 , 185–205 (2020).31100386
250. Lystad AH &amp; Simonsen A Mechanisms and pathophysiological roles of the ATG8 conjugation machinery. Cells 8 , 973 (2019).
251. Jean S &amp; Kiger AA Classes of phosphoinositide 3-kinases at a glance. J. Cell Sci 127 , 923–928 (2014).24587488
252. Simonsen A &amp; Tooze SA Coordination of membrane events during autophagy by multiple class III PI3-kinase complexes. J. Cell Biol 186 , 773–782 (2009).19797076
253. Funderburk SF , Wang QJ &amp; Yue Z The Beclin 1–VPS34 complex–at the crossroads of autophagy and beyond. Trends Cell Biol. 20 , 355–362 (2010).20356743
254. Tracey TJ , Steyn FJ , Wolvetang EJ &amp; Ngo ST Neuronal lipid metabolism: multiple pathways driving functional outcomes in health and disease. Front. Mol. Neurosci 11 , 10 (2018).29410613
255. Levine B &amp; Kroemer G Biological functions of autophagy genes: a disease perspective. Cell 176 , 11–42 (2019).30633901
256. New J &amp; Thomas SM Autophagy-dependent secretion: mechanism, factors secreted, and disease implications. Autophagy 15 , 1682–1693 (2019).30894055
257. Martinez J Microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 alpha (LC3)-associated phagocytosis is required for the efficient clearance of dead cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108 , 17396–17401 (2011).21969579
258. Florey O , Kim SE , Sandoval CP , Haynes CM &amp; Overholtzer M Autophagy machinery mediates macroendocytic processing and entotic cell death by targeting single membranes. Nat. Cell Biol 13 , 1335–1343 (2011).22002674
259. Martinez J Molecular characterization of LC3-associated phagocytosis reveals distinct roles for Rubicon, NOX2 and autophagy proteins. Nat. Cell Biol 17 , 893–906 (2015).26098576
260. Kim JY Noncanonical autophagy promotes the visual cycle. Cell 154 , 365–376 (2013).23870125
261. Negrete-Hurtado A Autophagy lipidation machinery regulates axonal microtubule dynamics but is dispensable for survival of mammalian neurons. Nat. Commun 11 , 1535 (2020).32210230
