LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


100968751
29656
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
Mitochondrion
1567-7249
1872-8278

35182728
9035127
10.1016/j.mito.2022.02.004
NIHMS1782937
Article
Site-specific mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegeneration
Vodičková Anežka 1
Koren Shon A. 1
Wojtovich Andrew P. 12
1 Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
2 Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA.
Corresponding author: Andrew P. Wojtovich, andrew_wojtovich@urmc.rochester.edu, address: 575 Elmwood Ave., Rochester NY, 14642 Box 711/604.
25 2 2022
5 2022
16 2 2022
01 5 2023
64 118
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Mitochondria are essential for neuronal survival and mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of neurodegeneration. The loss in mitochondrial energy production, oxidative stress, and changes in calcium handling are associated with neurodegenerative diseases; however, different sites and types of mitochondrial dysfunction are linked to distinct neuropathologies. Understanding the causal or correlative relationship between changes in mitochondria and neuropathology will lead to new therapeutic strategies. Here, we summarize the evidence of site-specific mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial-related clinical trials for neurodegenerative diseases. We further discuss potential therapeutic approaches, such as mitochondrial transplantation, restoration of mitochondrial function, and pharmacological alleviation of mitochondrial dysfunction.

mitochondrial dysfunction
neurodegeneration
mitochondria-targeting therapeutics
transplantation
optogenetics

pmc1. Introduction

Mitochondria participate in a variety of functions to maintain cellular homeostasis. Neurons are particularly sensitive to mitochondrial dysfunction due to their high dependence on oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) and low energy reserves (Hall et al., 2012; Schonfeld and Reiser, 2013). Consistent with this idea, neurodegenerative diseases often involve mitochondrial dysfunction at some stage of the disease. However, mitochondria participate in a wide variety of interconnected functions beyond ATP production, such as with calcium (Ca2+) buffering and reductive/oxidative (redox) stress sensing and defense, and it is unclear if mitochondrial dysfunction is the cause or consequence of pathology. In neurons, the interplay between mitochondria and the surrounding cellular milieu regulates the activation of signaling pathways, gene expression, and even synaptic transmission (Jung et al., 2020; Kann and Kovacs, 2007; Mustaly-Kalimi et al., 2018). Neurons are also sensitive to reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation and the vast majority of neurodegenerative diseases are associated with oxidative stress (Angelova and Abramov, 2018; Chen et al., 2012). The dominant role of mitochondrial dysfunction in neuronal damage and death has been reviewed elsewhere (Gibson et al., 2010; Joshi and Mochly-Rosen, 2018; Zhao et al., 2019). Here, we focus on the evidence of site-specific perturbations of neuronal mitochondria throughout neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), and the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration (ALS-FTD) spectrum. These neurogenerative diseases provide context to examine therapeutic strategies to address mitochondrial dysfunction, which include reprogramming metabolism, increasing the available mitochondrial pool, rescuing mitochondrial quality, and alleviating the factors causing mitochondrial dysfunction.

2. Mitochondrial function

Mitochondria are the metabolic hub of the cell and are responsible for the majority of cellular energy production through the process of OxPhos (Fig. 1), in which the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) generates a chemical and electrical gradient that is used to produce ATP (Vercellino and Sazanov, 2021). Aside from energy production, mitochondria are central to multiple cellular functions, including Ca2+ homeostasis, redox signaling, fatty acid oxidation and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Although all mitochondria share basic features of energy production, the roles of mitochondria may depend on tissue-specific or even subcellular localization-specific demands. In neurons, mitochondria are involved in neurotransmission and synaptic plasticity as well as neuronal differentiation (Iwata et al., 2020; Kann and Kovacs, 2007; Rangaraju et al., 2019; Silva et al., 2021). Moreover, the intracellular demands can also drive function, such that synaptic mitochondrial function can be different than mitochondria in the soma of the same cell (Brown et al., 2006; Stauch et al., 2014; Volgyi et al., 2015).

Mitochondria are dynamic and alter their shape, size, and number through fusion and fission and biogenesis. The mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) complex regulates the internal structure of the mitochondrion in concert with mitochondrial fission and fusion. In mammals, fusion is controlled by three GTPases: mitofusin 1 and 2, and optic atrophy protein 1 (OPA1) (Misaka et al., 2002; Santel and Fuller, 2001). Mitochondrial fission is regulated by cytosolic GTPase dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) and its adaptor proteins: transmembrane protein fission 1 (Fis1), mitochondrial fission factor (Mff), and mitochondrial dynamics proteins of 49 kDa and 51 kDa (MiD49/51) (Loson et al., 2013). Mitochondrial number can be increased through biogenesis, which is a coordinated process of nuclear- and mitochondria-encoded genes to facilitate the generation of new, functioning mitochondria. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes 13 proteins that form the core hydrophobic subunits of ETC complexes. The remaining mitochondrial proteins are nuclear-encoded and imported through the TIM/TOM protein complex.

Mitochondria also communicate with other cellular organelles and help regulate inter-organelle functions. Several mitochondria-organelle contact sites have been demonstrated (Murley and Nunnari, 2016), but the best described contact sites are those between mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), called mitochondria-associated ER membrane (MAMs). These contacts can serve for non-vesicular transport of phospholipids, translocation of Ca2+ from the ER to mitochondria, and regulation of mitochondrial dynamics and function (Hayashi et al., 2009; Vance, 2014).

The factors triggering mitochondrial dysfunction are diverse: age, genetic predispositions, unhealthy lifestyle, or stress. This is further compounded since mitochondrial function may be specialized to tissue-specific, cell-specific, and even subcellular-specific demands. Factors involving lifestyle or environmental and toxin exposure can also impair mitochondrial function through microbiome-produced toxins such as β-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) or nutrient deficits (Pistollato et al., 2016; Ra et al., 2021; Silva et al., 2020). Mitochondrial dysfunction often precipitates as reduced ETC activity that leads to excessive ROS generation at the expense of ATP production. When ROS levels accumulate beyond the removal capacity of endogenous antioxidant pathways, ROS can damage proteins, lipids and nucleic acids (such as nuclear and mtDNA). Mitochondrial dysfunction is also characterized by impaired Ca2+ homeostasis. Accumulation of Ca2+ in the mitochondrial matrix supports opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) and induces cytochrome c release, a crucial step in apoptosis. Furthermore, imbalances in mitochondrial dynamics (fusion/fission) and mitochondrial clearance (mitophagy) also contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial fusion/fission serves to distribute mitochondrial content to improve the properties of the entire mitochondrial network (Chan, 2020). Pathophysiological conditions can lead to mitochondria fragmentation and mitophagy disruption. Subsequently, impaired quality control machinery and accumulation of defective mitochondria reduce the overall mitochondrial energy production capacity in the cell (reviewed in (Chan, 2020; Yang et al., 2021)). Together, these crucial mitochondrial functions ensure neuronal health and activity and impairment in any of these pathways promotes neurodegenerative phenotypes.

3. Mitochondrial dysfunction in major neurological diseases

Neurodegenerative diseases involve the selective vulnerability of particular brain regions due to varying environmental, genetic, and pathomechanistic factors. Since neurons are uniquely energy demanding and postmitotic, they are especially vulnerable to stress arising from mitochondrial dysfunction. Consistent with this theory, mitochondria are commonly implicated in neurodegenerative diseases (Golpich et al., 2017). The nature of the initial triggering event of mitochondrial dysfunction may differ in each disease, such as a site-specific impairment of the ETC or a mutation in a protein regulating mitochondrial dynamics. However, the final state of each disease almost inevitably involves the impairment of many mitochondrial pathways from ATP generation, ROS formation and defense, calcium buffering, morphology and dynamics, mPTP opening, and cytochrome c release. This results in an impaired cellular energetic state whereby the neuron is unable to combat the growing stresses of toxic protein accumulation and ROS damage inherent to neurodegenerative diseases. Therapeutics aimed at combating these pathways have largely failed in the clinic since focusing on a single locus of impairment ignores that mitochondrial dysfunction is greater than the sum of any one particular defect (Table 1). Therefore, novel therapeutic agents must likely involve the amelioration of multiple different problems either through a broad molecular agent or combinatorial strategies.

3.1 Parkinson’s disease (PD)

Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that manifests with symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability that develop gradually over time. PD is characterized by a reduction of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. To date, the full mechanism explaining the neuronal loss is not fully elucidated (Franco et al., 2021). However, mitochondrial dysfunction is a critical factor throughout the development of PD from early to advanced stages (Fig. 2) (Coskun et al., 2012; Hattingen et al., 2009).

The deficiency of ETC complex I activity in postmortem PD substantia nigra tissue has been known since 1989 (Schapira et al., 1989; Schapira et al., 1990). Several in vivo studies have shown that chronic exposure to the complex I inhibitor rotenone (Betarbet et al., 2000; Cannon et al., 2009; Drolet et al., 2009; Sherer et al., 2003; Tanner et al., 2011) can mimic the features of PD. Similarly, the injection of neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP/MPP+) in humans induce PD symptoms (Ballard et al., 1985; Ramsay et al., 1986; Richardson et al., 2007). Inhibition of complex I generates ROS which subsequently cause oxidative stress, ultimately causing diminished ATP production and eventually cell death (Cenini et al., 2019; Trist et al., 2019). Oxidative stress and reduced ATP production facilitate oligomerization of α-synuclein in vitro (Esteves et al., 2009), the main neuropathological component involved in PD, suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction can directly lead to the progression of PD. Furthermore, α-synuclein associates with MAMs in brain tissue from humans (Guardia-Laguarta et al., 2014; Guardia-Laguarta et al., 2015), and subsequently disrupts Ca2+ exchange between ER and mitochondria which has been found to impair ATP production in vitro (Guardia-Laguarta et al., 2014; Guardia-Laguarta et al., 2015; Paillusson et al., 2017). Several studies have also demonstrated α-synuclein associates with mitochondria by interacting with outer membrane protein (OMM) proteins such as voltage-dependent anion channel 1 (VDAC) in vitro (Jacobs et al., 2019) and TOM20 in postmortem patient brain tissue (Di Maio et al., 2016), suggesting the disruption of mitochondrial protein transport in PD. In addition to binding to the OMM, α-synuclein oligomers can also impair function of the ETC, including oxidation of the catalytic β-subunit of ATP synthase in the mitochondrial matrix, and can subsequently trigger mPTP opening, in vivo or in cell lines derived from PD patients (Ludtmann et al., 2018; Zambon et al., 2019).

Outside of the ETC, the impairment in several other mitochondrial functions have been linked to PD. Altered mitochondrial dynamics (Van Laar and Berman, 2009) and a deficiency in the degradation of dysfunctional mitochondria through autophagy (mitophagy) (Liu et al., 2019a) have long since been associated with PD pathology. Mitochondria in PD patient samples or in cell lines derived from PD patients exhibit mitochondrial fragmentation and abnormal morphology (de Mattos et al., 1989; Trimmer et al., 2000). Decreased levels of the morphology-related proteins, OPA1 and Mfn2, were detected in model of seeded α-synuclein oligomerization in primary neurons (Mahul-Mellier et al., 2020). In vivo and in vitro studies have also shown inhibiting Drp1, a fission-related protein, exhibits neuroprotective effects, supporting the role of altered mitochondrial dynamics in PD progression (Fan et al., 2019; Grohm et al., 2012; Rappold et al., 2014).

Genetic analysis of PD patients has strongly supported the involvement of these pathways in PD (Park et al., 2018). Mutations in LRRK2 (leucine rich repeat kinase 2) were identified as the most frequent cause of familial PD (Lill, 2016). Various LRRK2 mutations have been described to promote oxidative stress in postmortem PD brain tissue (Angeles et al., 2011), alter mitochondrial morphology by diminishing mitochondrial fusion in PD patient-specific human neuroepithelial stem cells (Walter et al., 2019), and impede mitophagy in human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons (Hsieh et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018; Tolosa et al., 2020; Wauters et al., 2020). Mitochondrial dynamics are also linked to mitophagy, facilitated in part by the interaction between Parkin, a cytosolic E3 ubiquitin ligase, and the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) (Pickrell and Youle, 2015). Over a hundred mutations in Parkin and PINK1 are associated with PD from genetic screens of PD patients (Ge et al., 2020). The deficiency in either of these two proteins is associated with diminished intracellular transport of mitochondria, altered mitochondrial dynamics (fission and fusion), and mitophagy (Ge et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2011). Moreover, PINK-1 deficiency has been shown to restrict Ca2+ efflux by inhibiting NCLX (ion exchanger) activity, leading to Ca2+ accumulation and ultimately to mPTP opening in PINK1-deficient mammalian neurons (Gandhi et al., 2009). Mutations in DJ-1 have also been characterized in early-onset PD (Annesi et al., 2005; Bonifati et al., 2003). DJ-1 serves as a neuroprotective agent by upregulating transcription factors involved in antioxidant responses such as Nrf2, PI3K/PKB, and p53. DJ-1 also suppresses α-synuclein oligomerization and supports membrane potential regulation to protect against oxidative stress, highlighting the duality of ROS in the initial stages of PD pathology and the continual progression of the disease (Dolgacheva et al., 2019). Next, mutations of CHCHD2 are present in PD pathology and are thought to cause aberrant mitochondrial morphology in Drosophila and mammalian cells (Kee et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2017). Other recent studies have identified mutations in over two dozen more genes encoding mitochondria-localized proteins ranging from mitochondrial cristae morphology regulators (IMMT/Mic60), GTPases (RHOT2), protein importers (TOMM22), and others with unknown underlying pathogenic mechanisms with PD (Gialluisi et al., 2021).

To date, there is no effective treatment to prevent and/or stop PD development despite many different drug trials initiated over several decades. As is the case with many other neurodegenerative diseases, preclinical success of novel therapeutic agents to treat PD does not correlate to success in clinical trials and that includes drugs targeting dysregulated mitochondrial pathways in PD. For example, the benefit of exercise for enhancing muscle strength and improving balance in PD patients is known, (Bloem et al., 2015; Chung et al., 2016; Uhrbrand et al., 2015), but a clinical trial in which patients were treated with creatine monohydrate showed no positive effect on patient clinical outcomes (Writing Group for the et al., 2015). Moreover, the antioxidant coenzyme Q10 was tested in early-onset PD and showed no clinical benefit (Parkinson Study Group et al., 2014). Similarly, mitoQ (coenzyme Q linked to mitochondria-targeted moiety, see Chapter 4.4) was tested in phase 2 clinical trials with no beneficial effect over placebo (Snow et al., 2010). Nilotinib, an inhibitor of tyrosine kinase c-Abl that inhibits Parkin, has been reported as a promising neuroprotective agent (Karuppagounder et al., 2014), but a clinical trial revealed that despite satisfactory biosafety, nilotinib lacks efficacy (Simuni et al., 2021). Another clinical trial was conducted using isradipine, a calcium channel blocker used to treat high blood pressure, but the results fell short of expectations (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02168842). More novel drugs targeting mitochondrial pathways are currently in the pipeline, such as two inhibitors of LRRK2, DNL-201 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03710707) and DNL-151 (NCT04056689), which recently passed phase 1 clinical trials (reviewed in (Azeggagh and Berwick, 2021; Tolosa et al., 2020). Despite these studies, a safe and efficacious approach to treat PD has not yet passed clinical trials. Currently, the most common drug prescribed to PD patients is levodopa, a precursor of catecholamines that ameliorates motor symptoms of the disease. Levodopa is accompanied by carbidopa, an inhibitor of decarboxylase, that prevents metabolic breakdown of levodopa until reaching the brain (LeWitt, 2015).

3.2 Alzheimer’s disease (AD)

Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disease principally involving memory loss and cognitive impairment. The clinical symptoms of AD reflect the presence and spread of two defining pathological hallmarks in the human brain: β-amyloid (Aβ) extracellular plaques and intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) containing tau protein (Braak and Braak, 1991; Ingelsson et al., 2004; Knopman et al., 2021). These pathological signs appear in the frontal and temporal lobes before spreading to other areas of the neocortex during disease progression. The generally accepted timeline of AD progression describes an early increase in Aβ plaque pathology during the preclinical stage of the disease which induces downstream toxic events such as widespread gliosis, oxidative stress, NFT formation, synaptic dysfunction, and neuronal cell loss which ultimately causes a feed-forward cycle into progressive cognitive dysfunction (Hardy and Higgins, 1992; Ingelsson et al., 2004). However, recent research coupled with the failure of clinical trials targeting Aβ formation has reevaluated the molecular trigger(s) of AD in support of a multi-factorial nature of disease progression (Uddin et al., 2020). Aβ plaque pathology does not strongly correlate with cognitive dysfunction, unlike tau pathology, in part due to a ceiling effect early in disease progression (Ingelsson et al., 2004; Nelson et al., 2012). Instead, the impact of Aβ and tau NFTs likely relate to reciprocal interactions between many different aspects of the disease as a consequence of pathological aging, including mitochondrial dysfunction in the interconnected pathways of oxidative stress, ETC function, glucose metabolism, and mitophagy (Nunomura et al., 2001; Swerdlow et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2020).

The evidence for mitochondrial involvement in the progression of AD begins with early reports of oxidative stress in the brains of patients with AD (Fig. 3). Disrupted metabolism and accumulation of trace elements such as iron and aluminum were identified in AD brain as early as the 1950s (Goodman, 1953). Since free metals can produce ROS, these findings were connected to a growing body of evidence of increased oxidation of nuclear and mitochondrial nucleic acids (Nunomura et al., 1999), lipids (Butterfield et al., 2010), and proteins (Butterfield and Boyd-Kimball, 2019; Butterfield et al., 2011; Butterfield et al., 2007) in human AD patients, suggesting oxidative stress as an underlying mechanism (Butterfield et al., 2007), (Goodman, 1953). The accumulation of oxidized substrates was found localized to brain regions with AD pathology and as an early event in disease progression (Nunomura et al., 2001; Tayler et al., 2010). Interestingly, perturbations in mtDNA such as mutations or deletions, and changes in copy numbers or nucleotide oxidation levels were found correlated with AD in postmortem brain AD tissue (Soltys et al., 2019; Swerdlow et al., 2010, 2014).

Oxidative stress occurs partly due to impairment in the mitochondrial ETC. When operating under suboptimal conditions such as during hypoxia or nutrient deprivation, the ETC can act as a major source of cellular ROS (Berry et al., 2018). In AD, diminished ETC function has been shown since the 1990s, where decreased activity of every ETC complex has been demonstrated in AD using postmortem brain tissues, though the most consistent impairment in activity presents in complex I and complex IV (Kish et al., 1992; Liang et al., 2008; Mutisya et al., 1994). Complex IV activity is tightly coupled to complex V, ATP synthase, and can directly limit ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation. Impaired complex IV activity can also lead to ROS formation due to slowed electron flux onto molecular oxygen (Murphy, 2009). Similarly, slowed ETC function leads to ROS formation at complex I (Starkov, 2008), thereby linking ETC inhibition and ROS accumulation in AD. Oxidation of complex V subunits also presents during early preclinical stages of AD, which can lower complex V activity and precipitate further mitochondrial and cellular dysfunction through reduced ATP production (Beck et al., 2016; Terni et al., 2010). Furthermore, dysregulated mitochondrial calcium (mCa2+) levels have been reported in AD due to, at least in part, decreased levels of the mitochondrial sodium/calcium exchanger (NCLX) in AD brain (Jadiya et al., 2019). As mCa2+ regulates antioxidant responses, oxidative phosphorylation, and ultimately apoptosis (Luongo et al., 2015), uncontrollable mCa2+ can lead to a cycle of continually impaired mitochondrial activity, formation of the mPTP, and cell death.

Consistent with evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction due to ROS accumulation and diminished ETC function, deficits in glucose metabolism in AD have been well established. Positron emission tomography studies using a radio-labeled glucose or oxygen tracers have shown region-specific hypometabolism in patients with AD that has correlated well with histopathological studies (Frackowiak et al., 1981; Fukuyama et al., 1994; Silverman et al., 2001; Swerdlow, 2018). Reduction in metabolic oxygen consumption are consistent with reduced rates of complex IV activity found in AD brain. Furthermore, specific enzymes in the TCA cycle including α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (KGDHC) and pyruvate-dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) exhibit lower activity levels in AD brain samples (Gibson et al., 1998; Mastrogiacoma et al., 1996; Sheu et al., 1985; Sorbi et al., 1983), consistent with reduced glucose metabolism. AD brain samples also exhibit increasingly oxidized proteins involved in sugar metabolism (Castegna et al., 2002; Opii et al., 2008; Sultana et al., 2010), linking oxidative stress and metabolic defects in AD.

More recent evidence of site-specific impairments in AD have relied on studies using systems-biology bioinformatic investigations which can limit bias conferred by low sample sizes or antibody-based detection methods. One such study completed a large-scale proteomic analysis using over 2,000 individual brain samples to achieve statistical power in identifying changes in protein levels along AD progression (Johnson et al., 2020). In this study, mitochondrial and metabolic genes such as those involving sugar metabolism including glycolysis and TCA cycle enzymes were some of the strongest correlated to clinical features of AD. Strikingly, many, but not all, mitochondrial ETC proteins were significantly altered in AD, with the most being in complex I (Johnson et al., 2020). This included a limited subset of mitochondrially-encoded core proteins MT-CO2 of complex IV, MT-ND3 and -ND4 of complex I, and MT-ATP8 of complex V which all statistically decreased in AD patient brain samples. Another quantitative proteomic study assessed individual mitochondrial protein levels in AD versus age-matched control brains and found diminished levels of proteins among all ETC complexes in AD patient brain samples, though not in stoichiometric patterns (Adav et al., 2019). Another study correlated cognitive trajectory with postmortem protein levels to assess the relationship between specific proteins and cognitive stability with age and AD pathology (Wingo et al., 2019). This study identified a strong correlation between mitochondrial protein abundance and cognitive stability, even in patients with AD neuropathological features. Though most of these proteins associated with cognitive stability were part of complex I, others were involved in glucose metabolism. Interestingly, NDUFA1, an essential complex I protein involved in stabilizing complex I assembly, exhibited decreased protein levels in proteomic studies of AD (Johnson et al., 2020) and was strongly associated with cognitive stability (Wingo et al., 2019). Mutations in the NDUFA1 gene associate with diminished complex I activity and a neurodegenerative phenotype (Potluri et al., 2009), highlighting the potential of bioinformatic analyses in identifying novel site-specific alterations in mitochondrial function in AD for future study (Abyadeh et al., 2021; Rayaprolu et al., 2021).

Beyond simply diminishing enzymatic activities of mitochondria, ROS accumulation can also lead to altered mitochondrial dynamics including biogenesis, fission, fusion, and transport. In AD brain tissue, oxidized mtDNA is thought to associate with decreased mitochondria mtDNA copy number and a lower amount of healthy mitochondria (Hirai et al., 2001; Soltys et al., 2019). The genetic and environmental factors influencing mtDNA in AD was suggested to initiate a mitochondrial cascade hypothesis of AD wherein vulnerable hippocampal and cortical neurons are fated for death by early metabolic deficiencies as a result of mutations or oxidation of mtDNA and subsequent impairments in mitochondrial function, ultimately leading to ROS accumulation, AD pathology, and cognitive impairment (Swerdlow et al., 2014; Swerdlow and Khan, 2004). Consistent with this theory, particularly vulnerable neurons in AD are associated with decreased mitochondrial size and number and an overall decrease in the levels of mitochondrial transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1α) levels in AD brain tissue (Hirai et al., 2001; Qin et al., 2009). PGC-1α regulates a variety of biological responses and stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis, fatty acid oxidation, and induces antioxidant gene expression (Liang and Ward, 2006; Valle et al., 2005; Wu et al., 1999). Fission and fusion dynamics help mitochondria respond to stress and metabolic demand (Detmer and Chan, 2007; Kleele et al., 2021). In AD, mitochondrial fission is promoted by increased levels of pro-fission proteins Drp1 and Fis1 and decreased levels of pro-fusion proteins OPA1, Mfn1, Mfn2 (Zhu et al., 2013). Mitochondrial transport and degradation through autophagy (mitophagy) are also reportedly dysregulated in AD (Wang et al., 2009), though cellular and animal models of these dynamic processes provide better insight compared to postmortem brain samples. Critically, model systems recapitulating some pathophysiological hallmark of AD has shown that oligomers of Aβ and tau can localize with the mitochondria early in disease progression which alters mitochondrial morphology (Cieri et al., 2018; Del Prete et al., 2017; Manczak et al., 2006; Mungarro-Menchaca et al., 2002), induce ROS accumulation and impair ETC function (David et al., 2005; Hu et al., 2016), and impair transport to lysosomes for degradation (Guha et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2016). Moreover, levels of the mitochondrial protein import machinery TOM20 and TOM70 were also found diminished in AD patient samples (Chai et al., 2018). Effectively, nearly every alterable pathway in mitochondria become dysregulated in some fashion in AD or AD models, highlighting the importance of mitochondria-directed therapeutic strategies.

Most clinical trials for AD have focused on decreasing Aβ oligomers or aggregates in an attempt to stop the propagating cycle of cellular damage based on the amyloid cascade hypothesis (Liu et al., 2019b). Clinical trials for these drugs have had limited efficacy with often damaging side effects, further supporting a re-evaluation of the true molecular triggers for AD (Yiannopoulou et al., 2019). Over the years, clinical trials have tested the potential of antioxidants to combat the early signs of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in AD with limited success (Lloret et al., 2009; Perez Ortiz and Swerdlow, 2019). An example of earlier clinical trials investigated the polyphenol resveratrol, a potent activator of the deacetylase SIRT1 which contributes to transcriptional changes in response to energy imbalances (Sawda et al., 2017). Resveratrol was safe and well-tolerated, diminished some pathological biomarkers of AD, but overall had limited effect on rescuing cognitive performance (Turner et al., 2015). Another recent clinical trial for AD is investigating using free radical scavenger drugs targeted specifically to mitochondria, such as mitoQ (Shinn and Lagalwar, 2021). MitoQ clinical trials are ongoing for AD and other neurodegenerative diseases. While this approach will localize an antioxidant to mitochondria, non-targeted antioxidants have not shown cognitive improvement. Overall, specific mechanisms of mitochondrial involvement in the early stage progression of AD have been identified for decades, but still no effective therapeutic strategy has been developed. Frequently prescribed medications for AD include inhibitors of cholinesterase which alleviate some symptoms of AD through the increasing level of acetylcholine in the brain (Birks, 2006).

3.3 Huntington’s disease (HD)

Huntington’s disease is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease that results in progressive loss of motor and cognitive function. The disease is a result of a CAG trinucleotide repeat in the huntingtin (Htt) gene causing long polyglutamine tracks in the protein (Vonsattel and DiFiglia, 1998). The resulting mutant Htt (mHtt) protein is prone to misfolding, aggregation and accumulation (Soto, 2003). The Htt protein has broad localization with functions in transcription, vesicle trafficking, metabolism, and cell signaling (Reiner et al., 2003; Saudou and Humbert, 2016; Schulte and Littleton, 2011) The mHtt aggregates and proteolytic fragments disrupt the function of Htt and are toxic to the cell, leading to neuronal death and subsequent motor impairment and cognitive decline.

The pathways affected by mHtt are pleiotropic and include the loss of transcriptional regulation, oxidative damage, and mitochondrial dysfunction (Fig. 4) (Pandey and Rajamma, 2018). Importantly, like many neurodegenerative diseases, ROS and mitochondrial dysfunction are intimately connected to HD. Although there are varying reports on specific ETC dysfunction depending on the animal model and whether the sample was from a specific brain region or peripheral tissue. Moreover, depending on if the animal models used a fragment or full length mHtt can lead to inconsistencies in the literature. Building on the current models will address the gaps in our knowledge. Overall, mHtt protein misfolding and aggregation, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction are contributors to HD phenotypes. Despite the ubiquitous expression of Htt, degeneration is most severe in the striatum and the underlying basis for region specific sensitivity in HD is unclear. Here, we will briefly focus on the effects of mHtt on mitochondria and refer to reviews discussing other mechanisms (Bono-Yague et al., 2020; Cattaneo et al., 2005; Martin et al., 2015).

Mitochondrial proteins are encoded by both nuclear and mitochondrial genes and require coordinated transcription to maintain mitochondrial function. Interestingly, the deletion of PGC-1α, the transcription coactivator, results in some features characteristic of HD and other neurodegenerative diseases in vivo (Jesse et al., 2017; Johri et al., 2013). In the striatum, mHtt can impact glutamatergic signaling leading to misregulation of PGC-1α resulting oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. Likewise, mHtt aggregates can affect protein quality control pathways and transcriptional regulators also leading to an accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria and the overproduction of ROS in postmortem HD brain tissue (Martinez-Vicente et al., 2010; Siddiqui et al., 2012). Changes in mitochondrial function are often associated with changes in morphology. HD patients are reported to have abnormal mitochondrial morphology (Napoli et al., 2013; Squitieri et al., 2010). Moreover, mHtt can bind and enhance the activity of the mitochondrial fission related protein Drp1 resulting in fragmented mitochondria in vivo and in vitro (Song et al., 2011).

Accumulating evidence suggests that oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction are contributors to HD pathology. However, it is unclear if they are a causative agent of the disease or a consequent of other dysfunctional pathways. Early evidence demonstrated a reduction in ETC complex II, III and IV activity in postmortem HD brain tissue (Browne et al., 1997). Interestingly, complex I appears to be unaffected in the region-specific degeneration in HD. Emphasis on complex II activity in HD is supported by the systemic administration of complex II inhibitors malonate (Henshaw et al., 1994) and 3-NP (Borlongan et al., 1997; Vis et al., 1999) in animal models resulting in symptoms and neuropathology consistent with HD. The animals develop striatal degeneration and decreased ATP levels and elevated lactate (Borlongan et al., 1997), providing key insight into the selective vulnerability of HD arising from mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, the ETC relies on metals (e.g., iron sulfur centers) to coordinate electron transfer. Similar to AD, metal homeostasis is dysregulated in HD brain tissue (Bartzokis et al., 2007; Dexter et al., 1991) which can lead to ETC dysfunction and the generation of ROS through the Fenton reaction. The changes in ETC function can have downstream effects on cellular energetics and calcium signaling. Thus, as is the case with most neurodegenerative diseases, impaired mitochondrial functions affects processes throughout the cell beyond just the mitochondrion.

Therapeutic approaches for HD treat symptoms and currently there are no therapies to prevent or cure HD. Studies in model organisms such as C. elegans, drosophila and rodents have provided potential targets for therapeutic intervention but many of these findings have not translated to human studies. Since HD is an autosomal dominant disease, directly targeting the mHtt gene should eradicate disease phenotypes. Approaches to directly target mHtt and leave non-mutated Htt unaffected use antisense oligonucleotides to selectively decrease mHtt transcript levels. While this is a promising avenue, clinical studies have recently stopped due to the lack of efficacy. Full results of these studies are expected to be shared (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03225846; NCT03761849).

Mitochondria-targeted therapeutic strategies for HD have focused on attempts to prevent oxidative damage using small molecule antioxidants to scavenge ROS and include coenzyme Q10 (McGarry et al., 2017), d-alpha-tocopherol (Peyser et al., 1995), and idebenone (Bono-Yague et al., 2020; Ranen et al., 1996). The treatments were shown to be safe but did not prevent functional decline. Despite supportive animal studies, antioxidants in general have been largely unsuccessful in treating HD and neurodegenerative diseases (Steinhubl, 2008). Speculative explanations for failure include the wrong antioxidant, inappropriate doses, timing or duration. Moreover, our view towards ROS has expanded from the singular view of ROS causing oxidative damage to a pleiotropic signaling molecule affecting cellular stress and death. Much like selectively targeting the mHtt gene leaving non-mutated Htt intact, the site of ROS dysfunction should be selectively targeted leaving other sites unaffected. Additional approaches targeting energetics using fatty acids, also had mixed success (Huntington Study Group, 2008; Puri et al., 2005; Vaddadi et al., 2002). While this is not an exhaustive list of HD trials, it is intended to demonstrate that known targets and pathways identified by basic science have been unsuccessful in the clinic suggesting that a refined approach selectively targeting sites of dysfunction are needed. To date, HD is treated symptomatically through antidepressants, mood swing and irritability silencers, and chorea reducers (McColgan and Tabrizi, 2018).

3.4 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration (ALS-FTD spectrum)

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia are two distinct neurodegenerative disorders that share some overlapping genetic, clinical, and pathological features (Strong et al., 2017). ALS is a heterogeneous multisystemic neurodegenerative disorder featuring progressive muscle atrophy and motor dysfunction with upper and lower motor neuron involvement and some cognitive and behavioral features (Masrori and Van Damme, 2020). FTD is the second most prevalent form of dementia after AD and encompasses several disease subtypes, of which the behavioral variant, bvFTD, is the most prevalent (Finger, 2016; Knopman and Roberts, 2011; Neary et al., 1998). In bvFTD, common clinical symptoms involve drastic changes in personality and social conduct that can also involve executive dysfunction and speech deficits depending on the regions in the brain affected by atrophy (Ferrari et al., 2011; Neary et al., 1998). Roughly 50% of patients with ALS exhibit some form of behavioral alteration and cognitive or language impairment (Abrahams et al., 2004; Mackenzie and Feldman, 2005; Masrori and Van Damme, 2020). A relatively lower percentage of patients with FTD exhibit signs of ALS (5–10%), though subclinical motor degeneration can be found in about 50% of cases (Ferrari et al., 2011; Johnson et al., 2005; Lipton et al., 2004). In addition to similar clinical features, ALS and FTD share many genetic and pathological properties, leading to the formation of the ALS-FTD spectrum of disease (Ferrari et al., 2011). Among these many disease subtypes, mitochondrial dysfunction emerges as a common aspect of disease pathogenesis, albeit directly or indirectly (Fig. 5).

Both ALS and FTD are associated with some form of genetic inheritance to varying degrees (Rohrer et al., 2009). Most cases of ALS are sporadic with no known genetic inheritance patterns, unlike FTD, where roughly 40% of FTD cases are associated with some form of genetic inheritance involving disease associated mutations (Boylan, 2015). Investigating these disease-associated mutants enables the elucidation of common pathophysiological mechanisms leading to ALS-FTD symptoms. For example, a mutation in CHCHD10 was recently discovered to be involved in ALS-FTD pathogenesis in humans ((Boylan, 2015), reviewed in (Cozzolino et al., 2015)). In this study, fibroblasts and muscle cells collected from a large cohort of patients with ALS-FTD symptoms revealed varied ETC function, ranging from individuals with deficiency in a single complex to concurrent disrupted activities of complex I, III, IV, and V (Boylan, 2015). In one of these individuals, a missense mutation in CHCHD10 was identified. The gene CHCHD10 encodes a protein which was found to localize in the inner mitochondrial membrane and be enriched in cristae junctions. Overexpression of the mutated form of CHCHD10 disrupted cristae maintenance and led to a fragmented mitochondrial network, common to other ALS-FTD disease subtypes (Boylan, 2015). A follow-up study in a patient with this autosomal dominant ALS-causing mutation in CHCHD10 identified severely diminished complex I activity along with other bioenergetic and mitochondrial pathways, highlighting energy deficiency as a mechanism contributing to the selective vulnerability of neurons involved in ALS-FTD (Straub et al., 2021).

Other disease-associated genetic mutations relating to mitochondrial function have been identified in disease subtypes among the ALS-FTD spectrum. The first disease-causing mutation found for ALS was a mutation in copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1), which represents roughly 20% of familial ALS (Rosen et al., 1993). SOD1 catalyzes the reaction of superoxide into hydrogen peroxide and is found in the cytoplasm but can be located in the intermembrane space (IMS) (Tafuri et al., 2015). Since this initial finding, over 150 SOD1 mutations have been linked to ALS/FTD and have expanded to include the impairment of most ETC complexes (Synofzik et al., 2012). Dysregulated SOD1 is thought to increase ROS and subsequently impair ETC function, as measured in patient muscle biopsies (Crugnola et al., 2010; Tan et al., 2014), and VDAC1 activity, as measured in in vitro and in vivo models (Shteinfer-Kuzmine et al., 2019; Tan et al., 2013; Tan et al., 2014). Together, these two defects can lead to deficient ATP production and exchange across the outer mitochondrial membrane. The most prevalent genetic alteration associated with FTD and ALS, however, is a repeat expansion in a non-coding region of C9ORF72 (Renton et al., 2011). Though its normal function remains undetermined, this mutated form of C9ORF72 can lead to the pathological accumulation of proteins containing dipeptide repeats (DPRs). A mouse model of human C9ORF72 repeat expansion recently reported that these DPRs can associate with ATP5A1, a subunit of ATP synthase complex V, and correspondingly lead to its ubiquitination, degradation, and ultimately decreased expression levels. Decreased ATP5A1 was also found in some ALS/FTD patient brain samples, suggesting a common mechanism in humans. Ectopically re-expressing ATP5A1 in these mice rescued neuronal survival, strongly suggesting that the selective vulnerability of these neurons involves complex V-related dysfunction (Renton et al., 2011). Other ALS/FTD mutations have also been associated with ETC failure, defects in mitochondrial morphology and dynamics, dysregulated MAMs, accumulation of ROS, and impairments in mitochondrial protein transport (Cozzolino and Carri, 2012; Lau et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2014).

Considerable evidence has associated mitochondrial dysfunction in sporadic cases of ALS/FTD, though the exact etiology remains unclear. Several studies have screened muscle biopsies of patients with symptoms consistent with ALS/FTD and noted consistent mitochondrial deficiencies in complex IV, cytochrome c oxidase (Borthwick et al., 2006; Finsterer, 2003; Johnston et al., 1995). One large study screened 50 patients and noted “variably severe but unequivocal” complex IV deficiency in roughly half of these patients, a remarkable finding given the broad genetic underpinnings of the ALS/FTD spectrum (Crugnola et al., 2010). Several patients with markedly severe defects reportedly exhibited a range of other ETC complex impairment, suggesting a common mitochondrial defect, but one not necessarily stemming from the same mechanism.

Clinical trials aimed at rescuing mitochondrial activity in patients with ALS/FTD exhibited conflicting results, with half a dozen mitochondria-related compounds exhibiting promising preclinical or phase 2 efficacy that did not translate into phase 3 studies (Mitsumoto et al., 2014). One such clinical trial involved Dexpramipexole, a compound thought to inhibit mPTP opening and prevent stress-related depolarizations of mitochondria (Alavian et al., 2012). Though well-tolerated in humans, dexpramipexole did not lead to robust rescue of any endpoint criteria compared to placebo (Cudkowicz et al., 2011; Cudkowicz et al., 2013). Taken together, these failures of mitochondria-targeted (and other) clinical trials for ALS/FTD are likely a product, at least in part, due to the broad range of mechanisms involved in the disease spectrum, and suggest alternative treatment strategies may be beneficial. Current medications used to alleviate symptoms of ALS-FTD spectrum, patients are prescribed riluzole, a blocker of sodium channels, and further with physical therapy, and antidepressants (Liscic et al., 2020).

4. Therapeutic approaches

As previously discussed, defects in mitochondrial function are implicated throughout the progression of neurodegenerative diseases, though the initial impairment may differ. In the following sections, we focus on various therapeutic strategies targeting mitochondria at different stages of dysfunction (Fig. 6). First (see Chapter 4.1), we describe the possibilities and limits of exogenous and/or endogenous mitochondria application as a way to increase the total number of healthy mitochondria in degenerating tissue. Next (see Chapter 4.2), we discuss the whole endogenous mitochondrial network and investigate how to increase the number of healthy mitochondria through biogenesis and also how to improve mitochondrial dynamics. Third (see Chapter 4.3), we enter the mitochondria and examine in detail the possibilities of normalizing metabolic pathways affected by mitochondrial dysfunction. Lastly (see Chapter 4.4), we discuss approaches alleviating symptoms of mitochondrial dysfunction.

4.1 Mitochondrial transfer and transplantation

Previous therapeutic strategies have largely focused on pharmacological mitigation of mitochondrial damage already present in cells, but another approach is to replenish the functional mitochondria pool through intercellular transfer or exogenous transplantation (Lightowlers et al., 2020). One recent study has described the endogenous, intercellular transfer of mitochondria from primary astrocytes to primary neurons injured by stroke-like conditions (Hayakawa et al., 2016). Similarly, the silencing of Miro-1, a protein that links OMM to microtubules, preventing intracellular movement of mitochondria and facilitating mitophagy, decreased mitochondrial trafficking from primary astrocytes to primary neurons under cisplatin chemotherapeutic treatment (English et al., 2020). Current mechanistic studies of mitochondrial transfer have shown that mitochondria can be transferred both through vesicular means in vitro and in vivo (Peruzzotti-Jametti et al., 2021) and more directly through tunneling nanotubes between cells in vitro (Wang and Gerdes, 2015). Given that the endogenous pool of mitochondria available to transfer may be limited, a therapeutic approach using mitochondrial transfer from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can supplement the available amount of mitochondria (Cheng et al., 2020). Stem cells have long been favored for their regenerative potential. Accordingly, stem cells reportedly donate mitochondria to injured neurons in cell culture conditions (Babenko et al., 2015; Boukelmoune et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019). Further mechanistic studies are likely required to understand the physiological stability, efficacy, and function of transferred endogenous or patient-derived-iPSC mitochondria before targeted therapeutic strategies can be explored.

Another approach is to isolate respiratory competent mitochondria for direct injection into tissues or target cells. These methods have had success in animal models of ischemia/reperfusion injury rabbits (Cowan et al., 2016; Masuzawa et al., 2013; McCully et al., 2009). Mitochondria isolated from human cardiac fibroblasts (Cowan et al., 2016), rabbit muscle (Masuzawa et al., 2013), and rabbit heart (McCully et al., 2009) were injected directly into post-reperfusion (Cowan et al., 2016; Masuzawa et al., 2013) or post-ischemic (McCully et al., 2009) area of the heart alone (Cowan et al., 2016) or coupled with a vehicle solution to facilitate uptake (Masuzawa et al., 2013; McCully et al., 2009), resulting in a reduction in infarct size. Strikingly, the same approach has already seen success in human trials using isolated patient skeletal muscle mitochondria which were transplanted into the myocardium of five pediatric patients suffering from ischemic myocardial injury (Emani and McCully, 2018). Recovery of cardiac function was observed in four patients, but due to study design limitations, the direct effect of mitochondrial transplantation is unclear (reviewed in (Doulamis and McCully, 2021). Regarding brain injury, the delivery of exogenous muscular mitochondria to the postischemic rat brain exhibits neuroprotective features (Zhang et al., 2019) and that human hepatic mitochondria can naturally translocate to the human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell line (Shi et al., 2017). Moreover, mitochondrial transplantation was followed by improved bioenergetic parameters in a mouse model of MPTP-induced PD (Shi et al., 2017). However, whether transplanted mitochondria mitigate neurodegenerative decline remains unclear due to questions of long-term stability and effect.

There are many open questions that are to be addressed before mitochondrial transplantation can be adopted in the treatment of neurodegeneration diseases. The goal of mitochondrial transplantation is to increase the proportion of functional mitochondria in the total mitochondrial pool. The number and the capabilities of mitochondria depend in part of the original host cell and range from hundreds to thousands of mitochondria per cell. Therefore, both the donor and recipient tissue need to be optimized for different diseases. Moreover, mitochondria are dynamic, undergoing rounds of fission and fusion resulting in the mixing of contents. The number of transferred mitochondria that are incorporated into the target cell are often limited and it is unclear if the few transplanted mitochondria are sufficient to have a direct impact on the bioenergetics parameters of the cell or brain at large. It is also unclear if the new transplanted mitochondria undergo fission and fusion with endogenous mitochondria, rendering the beneficial mitochondrial population potentially isolated. Given that the half-life of mitochondria is several days to weeks, a one-time mitochondrial injection is unlikely to possess the long-term protective features (Gollihue et al., 2018), especially when considering the decade long timescale of neurodegenerative diseases.

Interestingly, it has recently been published that viable mitochondria or mitochondrial fragments are present in murine and human blood (Al Amir Dache et al., 2020; Stephens et al., 2020), but the functionality of their oxidative phosphorylation apparatus was later questioned (Stier, 2021). Cell-free mitochondria possess complex IV activity in vitro, but there is no other indication of normal ETC function. Since mitochondria circulating in the blood do not exhibit OxPhos activity, they may have a signaling or other unknown role or simply be part of residual cellular contents in the midst of degradation.

Do transplanted mitochondria serve an energetic role or are there other mitochondria-associated factors mediating the protective effect? The utilization of exogenous particles with defined properties targeting dysfunctional neurons could be an interesting direction to answer these questions. Extracellular vesicles are comprised of cellular contents surrounded by a lipid bilayer that are secreted into the extracellular space by different cells. The contents of extracellular vesicles are determined by the cell type and their post-secretory purpose. One of the subtypes of extracellular vesicles are exosomes. Exosomes are produced by all cell types and are composed of the specific lipid membrane and various inner content defining their role (signaling, clearance, etc.) (Doyle and Wang, 2019). Accordingly, artificial exosomes containing the ETC, among other enzymes, that are able to enter spheroids and produce ATP for hours have been developed (Kumar et al., 2021). However promising, these artificial respiring exosomes for mobile ATP production still need considerable refinement before being used in the clinic to treat neurodegeneration. Taken together, mitochondrial transfer or transplantation seem to be a promising therapeutic approach, but further research is required to address these open questions before clinical use.

4.2 Mitochondrial biogenesis and quality control

Another approach to treat mitochondrial dysfunction is to reduce the number of damaged mitochondria by increasing the biogenesis of new mitochondria. The master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, PGC-1α, is responsible for initiating a cascade that results in an increase of mitochondria generation. PGC-1α plays a role in neurodegenerative diseases as discussed, but no clinical trials employing PGC-1α or its activators in regard to neurodegeneration have been performed to date (Simmons et al., 2020). Building new mitochondria is an energetically demanding process and the cellular damage and energetic defects seen in advanced neurodegeneration may prevent biogenesis from being a viable target. However, this approach may be efficacious during the prodromal or early stages of disease progression, prior to the development of widespread mitochondrial failure and energetic crisis. Mitochondrial dysfunction is accompanied by oxidative stress and mitochondrial DNA mutations. Since mtDNA encodes subunits of essential components of ETC complexes, mutations in mtDNA can result in impaired ATP production. While widely accessible genetic therapies have not yet been developed, one promising approach would be to deliver healthy mtDNA to the cell via mitochondrial transplantation. However, mitochondria are heteroplasmic and contain multiple copies of mtDNA that are mixed during the process of fission and fusion. The threshold whereby accumulated mtDNA precipitates mitochondrial dysfunction is unclear and the amount of non-mutated mtDNA needed to reverse the phenotype is unknown.

Proteostatic failure is a hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases, often caused in part by oxidative damage preventing the proper clearance of toxic protein accumulations. As mitochondria are both a major source and sink of ROS, mitochondrial proteins are often early targets of ROS damage which can act as a trigger to induce greater mitochondrial defects. Therefore, an approach to selectively turnover these dysfunctional protein copies or otherwise induce the expression of new, undamaged proteins may ameliorate impairment. In addition to increasing the expression of endogenous proteins, another approach could regulate mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics to stimulate the production of endogenous proteins and increase the pool of healthy mitochondria. One such molecule affecting mitochondrial dynamics is mdivi-1 (mitochondrial division inhibitor 1), a quinazonilone derivative that inhibits the mitochondrial fission protein Drp1. Mdivi-1 has performed neuroprotective role in a rat model of PD (Bido et al., 2017), in ischemic brain injury in primary cells (Wang et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2013), and in a mouse model of AD (Baek et al., 2017). Moreover, mdivi-1 also inhibits Drp-1-independent fission, controls Ca2+ concentrations in the ER, and decreases membrane potential in vitro (Ruiz et al., 2018). However, mdivi-1 inhibits complex I (Bordt et al., 2017) and thus may contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction. Other pharmacological compounds which can inhibit aberrant mitochondrial dynamics may have fewer off-target effects and thus exhibit better therapeutic potential.

4.3 Reprograming metabolism

The effects of site-specific mitochondrial dysfunction can result in secondary effects on metabolism. For example, complex I oxidizes NADH and the loss in activity alter NADH/NAD+ ratios, thereby impacting downstream metabolic reactions. The addition of exogenous proteins that counteract the downstream effects can normalize metabolism despite the primary site of dysfunction. Exogenous enzymes such as alternative oxidase (AOX) and the yeast NADH dehydrogenase (Ndi1) can rescue a dysfunctional ETC and directly modulate the QH2/Q ratio. Ndi1 transfers electrons from NADH to Q and leads to a high QH2/Q ratio. Since complex I is inhibited in PD, AD, and ALS-FTD spectrum patients, expression of Ndi1 or other exogenous enzymes could provide neuroprotection. Similarly, AOX transfers electrons from QH2 to oxygen and the expression of AOX could help to mitigate energy dysfunction resulting from complex II deficiency in HD. However, this approach lacks temporal control of AOX/Ndi1 enzymes action and there is currently no mechanism to turn on or off activity. Moreover, Ndi1 expression extends, and AOX expression does not affect, lifespan in Drosophila melanogaster (Bahadorani et al., 2010; Sanz et al., 2010; Scialo et al., 2016). Given that all described neurodegenerative diseases have age as a risk factor, further study of AOX/Ndi1 could be beneficial.

The spatiotemporal control over metabolism would allow for precise manipulation cellular function. Optogenetics is a technique that employs light-sensitive proteins to control cellular processes and has been widely used in neuroscience to control neuronal activity. Individual neurons or regions can be silenced or activated using light-sensitive ion channels or proton pumps to alter the cell membrane potential. This approach is widely used to dissect neuronal networks and characterize behavior and memory (Chen et al., 2021; Chettih and Harvey, 2019; Gong et al., 2020; Grajales-Reyes et al., 2021; Jackman et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2017; Okuyama et al., 2016; Pardi et al., 2020; Vetere et al., 2019; Yamamuro et al., 2020). However, the application of light to target cells deep in the tissue is a limitation. Visible light is dispersed in the brain, but near-infrared light (NIR, ranging 650–1350 nm) can deeply penetrate brain tissue (Hamblin, 2016). Additionally, new approaches to delivery light to the tissue are being developed. Recently, upconversion nanoparticles capable of absorbing NIR light and subsequently emitting light of specific visible wavelength (Chen et al., 2018) have been used to stimulate dopamine release. Next, a non-surgical method using systematic viral supply of the channelorhodpsin ChRmine to activate specific part of the brain in a depth up to 7 mm by light was established (Chen et al., 2021). These innovative procedures are a promising start on the road to developing a safe and effective non-invasive method that can be applicable to humans.

Recent approaches have targeted optogenetic tools to mitochondria to directly alter mitochondrial function or protonmotive force (pmf). Mitochondria are dynamic and are trafficked throughout the neuron to meet specific sites of energy demand. Optogenetic control of organelle transport (van Bergeijk et al., 2015) may be implicated in PD pathology, because mitochondrial intracellular transport is impaired in PD, preventing mitophagy. Thus, facilitating the movement of dysfunctional mitochondria might have beneficial effect on neuronal health. Another optogenetic construct, mitoDR (mitochondrial delta-rhodopsin) directly targeted the mitochondrial membrane potential. Upon light activation, mitoDR alleviated the deleterious effect of CHCHD2 deficiency in a Drosophila PD model (Imai et al., 2019). The vast majority of neurodegenerative disorders are accompanied by oxidative stress. ROS generation is reinforced by high pmf, therefore, mitochondrial uncoupling in situ could mitigate the harmful ROS action. The mitochondrial light switches or mtSWITCH are light-activated proton pumps that exert spatiotemporal control over the pmf and metabolism. The proton-pump Mac from Leptosphaeria maculans was incorporated in the inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) of C. elegans in two orientations (Berry et al., 2020a; Berry et al., 2020b). One construct that increases the pmf - mitochondria-ON (mtON), and another that decreases the pmf - mitochondria-OFF (mtOFF). The mtOFF might reduce ROS production through pmf dissipation or silence dysfunctional mitochondria. Under ischemic condition, pmf collapses, leading to ATP consumption by ATP synthase. mtON can compensate for dysfunctional ETC activity (Berry et al., 2020b). In particular, mtON compensated for mutant complex I activity in C. elegans. Despite all the encouraging results observed in animal models, the application of optogenetic tools in patient’s neuronal mitochondria is a distant future as safety and efficacy concerns need to be addressed.

4.4 Alleviation of the mitochondrial dysfunction symptoms

In addition to targeting the site of dysfunction, the consequence or symptoms of dysfunction can be targeted. Oxidative stress is a hallmark of neurodegeneration. Given the overwhelmed redox system of organisms due to excessive ROS production in an environment with dysfunctional mitochondria, supplementation with antioxidants and/or ROS scavengers can mitigate the negative actions of oxidative stress. The widely available antioxidants include vitamins, N-acetyl cysteine, metals (selenium, zinc), α-Lipoic acid, glutathione, and coenzyme Q. Although antioxidants reduce oxidative stress, attempts at treating diseases with antioxidants has been largely unsuccessful in clinical trials. There are many speculative reasons for this failure which may include incorrect dosage, using the wrong antioxidant, or in adequate duration. Some antioxidants, such as Vitamin E can act both as an electron acceptor and a donor depending on the conditions. High doses of antioxidants have been shown to be harmful (Miller et al., 2005; Rayman et al., 2018). Likewise, too small of a dose may not be sufficient to scavenge the overproduced of ROS. The type of ROS being overproduced is also a consideration for determining the correct antioxidant since not all antioxidants will react equally with a particular oxidant. Additionally, clinical trials take several years, whereas oxidative stress may be present for a long time before symptom onset, suggesting that longer exposure to antioxidants may be necessary (Steinhubl, 2008).

Historically, the first synthetic compound linking antioxidant features (α-tocopherol) and the ability to target mitochondria (triphenylphosphonium, TPP+) mitovitE was synthesized in 1999 (Smith et al., 1999). In upcoming years, several compounds were developed combining the same mitochondria-targeting molecule (TPP+) and various antioxidants: mitoQ (antioxidant coenzyme Q) (Kelso et al., 2001), SkQ (antioxidant plastoquinone) (Antonenko et al., 2008), and mitoTEMPO (antioxidant piperidine nitroxide (Tempo)) (Trnka et al., 2008). Regarding discussed diseases, mitoQ is currently undergoing testing for AD (see Chapter 2.2 and Table 1) and completed a stage 2 trial in PD patients but was stopped with no beneficial effect (see Chapter 2.1 and Table 1) (Snow et al., 2010). The mitochondria-targeting group (TPP+) requires mitochondrial pmf and it is unclear if antioxidants using this targeting strategy are able to reach dysfunctional mitochondria, which would be characterized by a low pmf. However, these findings imply that chasing general ROS generation may not be sufficient to improve mitochondrial dysfunction. Another possibility is to target the source of ROS via small site-specific suppressors known as S1QELs (Brand et al., 2016) and S3QELs (Orr et al., 2015), which inhibit ROS generation by preventing electron leakage from ETC complex I and complex III, respectively, without affecting enzyme activity. These molecules would act continuously on the source of damaging ROS, which could be more effective that the single action of antioxidants. However, this small molecule approach currently lacks a mechanism to selectively target dysfunctional tissue.

Another approach is to use peptides targeted to mitochondria. The synthetic tripeptide elamipretide (SS-31, Bendavia). Elamipretide binds to IMM protein cardiolipin that is essential for cristae formation. It has been shown that SS-31 enhances ATP production and oxygen consumption and reduces ROS generation in vitro (Birk et al., 2014), and in vivo (Dai et al., 2014). Furthermore, its neuroprotective role has been demonstrated in PD model mouse (Yang et al., 2009). Despite promising results in animal models, the outcomes of phase 3 clinical trials are contradictory. Phase 3 of clinical trials applying elamipretide to cure the primary mitochondrial myopathy failed (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03323749), but phase 2/3 of clinical trials supplementation of elamipretide improved the conditions of patients suffering from Barth syndrome manifested by disturbed cardiolipin metabolism (Reid Thompson et al., 2021). In conclusion, alleviation of symptoms could serve as a supportive secondary treatment, but primary treatment should selectively target dysfunctional neurons and rely on strategies that do not require functional mitochondria.

5. Conclusions

Mitochondrial dysfunction is a hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases. Mitochondrial dysfunction occurs in the early stages of neurodegeneration with varying degrees of tissue and cell-type specificity. Whether specific sites of dysfunction are causes or consequences of neurodegeneration remains to be elucidated, but drugs targeting these specific sites of mitochondrial dysfunction may confer protection against disease. New approaches for the treatment of mitochondrial dysfunction include mechanisms to replace damaged mitochondria, artificially increasing ATP production, and methods to reprogram metabolism and ROS defense seem hopeful. However, these and other therapeutic strategies for neurodegenerative diseases remain mostly hypothetical with varying degrees of evidence for efficiacy in humans. The sites of mitochondrial dysfunction among neurodegenerative diseases are highly overlapping and yet can differ even among patients of the same disease subtype. This complexity highlights the need for targeting the right site in the right patients with the right drug, or by engineering novel strategies that can broadly ameliorate dysfunction. Unraveling the role of site-specific mitochondrial dysfunction is therefore a promising approach for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.

6. Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (R01NS115906, R21CA242843, R01NS092558).

Abbreviations:

Aβ β-amyloid

AD Alzheimer’s disease

ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

AOX ubiquinol oxidase

ATP5A1 ATP synthase subunit alpha

bvFTD behavioral variant FTD

Ca2+ calcium

CHCHD2 Coiled-Coil-Helix-Coiled-Coil-Helix Domain Containing protein 2

CHCHD10 Coiled-Coil-Helix-Coiled-Coil-Helix Domain Containing protein 10

C9orf72 guanine nucleotide exchange C9orf72

DJ-1 Parkinson’s disease protein 7

DPRs dipeptide repeats

Drp1 GTPase dynamin-related protein 1

EPA eicosapentaenoic acid

ER endoplasmic reticulum

ETC electron transport chain

Fis1 mitochondrial fission 1 protein

FTD frontotemporal dementia

HD Huntington’s disease

Htt huntingtin

HUFAs unsaturated fatty acids

IMM inner mitochondrial membrane

IMS intermembrane space

LRRK2 leucine rich repeat kinase 2

MAMs mitochondria-associated ER membranes

mCa2+ mitochondrial calcium

mdivi-1 mitochondrial division inhibitor 1

Mff mitochondrial fission factor

Mfn1/2 mitofusin 1/2

mHtt mutated huntingtin

MICOS mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system

mitoDR mitochondrial delta-rhodopsin

mPTP mitochondrial permeability transition pore

MPTP/MPP+ 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine

MT-ATP8 ATP synthase protein 8

MT-CO2 cytochrome c oxidase subunit 2

mtDNA mitochondrial DNA

MT-ND3/4 NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase chain 3/4

mtOFF mitochondria-OFF

mtON mitochondria-ON

NCLX mitochondrial sodium calcium exchanger

Ndi1 rotenone-insensitive NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase

NDUFA1 NADH dehydrogenase [ubiquinone] 1 alpha subcomplex subunit 1

NFTs neurofibrillary tangles

NIR near-infrared light

3-NP 3-nitropropionic acid

Nrf2 nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2

OMM outer mitochondrial membrane

OPA1 optic atrophy protein 1

OxPhos oxidative phosphorylation

p53 cellular tumor antigen p53

PD Parkinson’s disease

PGC-1α peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha

PI3K/PKB phosphoinositide-3-kinase–protein kinase B

PINK1 PTEN-induced kinase 1

pmf protonmotive force

Q ubiquinone

QH2 ubiquinol

RHOT2 mitochondrial Rho GTPase 2

ROS reactive oxygen species

SIRT1 NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin-1

SOD1 superoxide dismutase 1

TCA tricarboxylic acid cycle

VDAC voltage-dependent anion channel

Fig. 1 The mitochondrial electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation.

The electron transport chain (ETC) is comprised of protein complexes that transfer electrons from reducing equivalents to oxygen, ultimately generating a protonmotive force (pmf). More specifically, electrons enter complex I or complex II and are passed to coenzyme Q. Complex III then transfers electrons from coenzyme Q to cytochrome c. Finally, electrons are transferred from cytochrome c to molecular oxygen by complex IV, resulting in water. Throughout the process, protons are pumped from the matrix to the intermembrane space generating the pmf, which is composed of a chemical and electrical gradient. ATP synthase utilizes the pmf to produce ATP by shuttling protons back into the matrix. Together, these complexes couple the movement of electrons and protons to generate electrical and chemical gradients that fuel ATP production. Protein shapes are derived from RCSB protein data bank (PDB) structures. Complex I (6ZR2), complex II (1ZOY), complex III (1L0N), complex IV (1OCC), complex V (5ARA), cyt c – cytochrome c, IMM – inner mitochondrial membrane, IMS – intermembrane space, Q – ubiquinone, TCA cycle – tricarboxylic acid cycle.

Fig. 2 Schematic representation of site-specific neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson’s disease is represented by a blue-colored shapes with an arrow indicating increased or decreased activity or amount. The proteins represented in the figure include the proteins mentioned in this text, but further detailed review articles are referred to in relevant sections. Where available, protein shapes are derived from RCSB protein data bank (PDB) structures.

CHCHD2 - Coiled-Coil-Helix-Coiled-Coil-Helix Domain Containing protein 2, complex I – NADH dehydrogenase (6ZR2), complex II – succinate dehydrogenase (1ZOY), complex III - cytochrome c reductase (1L0N), complex IV – cytochrome c oxidase (1OCC), complex V – ATP synthase (5ARA), cyt c – cytochrome c, DJ-1 – Parkinson’s disease protein 7 (3BWE), ER – endoplasmic reticulum, IMM – inner mitochondrial membrane, IMMT – Mic60/mitofilin, IMS – intermembrane space, LRRK2 – leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (6XAF), MAMs – mitochondria-associated ER membranes, Mfn2 – mitofusin 2 (6JFN), Miro (6D71), NCLX – mitochondrial sodium calcium exchanger (3V5U), OMM – outer mitochondrial membrane, OPA1 – optic atrophy protein 1 (6JTG), Parkin (5C9V), PINK1 - PTEN-induced kinase 1 (5OAT), Q – ubiquinone, RHOT2 - mitochondrial Rho GTPase 2, ROS – reactive oxygen species, TCA cycle – tricarboxylic acid cycle, Tom20 (1OM2), Tom22 (7CK6).

Fig. 3 Schematic representation of site-specific neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease is represented by a blue-colored shapes with an arrow indicating increased or decreased activity or amount. The proteins represented in the figure include the proteins mentioned in this text, but further detailed review articles are referred to in relevant sections. Where available, protein shapes are derived from RCSB protein data bank (PDB) structures.

Complex I – NADH dehydrogenase (6ZR2), complex II – succinate dehydrogenase (1ZOY), complex III – cytochrome c reductase (1L0N), complex IV – cytochrome c oxidase (1OCC), complex V – ATP synthase (5ARA), cyt c – cytochrome c, Drp1 –dynamin-related protein 1 (4H1U), Fis1 – mitochondrial fission 1 protein (1PC2), IMM – inner mitochondrial membrane, IMS – intermembrane space, KGDHC – alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (2JGD), Mfn1 – mitofusin 1 (5GNS), Mfn2 – mitofusin 2 (6JFN), NCLX – mitochondrial sodium calcium exchanger (3V5U), OMM – outer mitochondrial membrane, OPA1 – optic atrophy protein 1 (6JTG), PDHC – pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (6CFO), Q – ubiquinone, ROS – reactive oxygen species, TCA cycle – tricarboxylic acid cycle, Tom20 (1OM2), Tom70 (2GW1).

Fig. 4 Schematic representation of site-specific neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction in Huntington’s disease.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in Huntington’s disease is represented by a blue-colored shapes with an arrow indicating increased or decreased activity or amount. The proteins represented in the figure include the proteins mentioned in this text, but further detailed review articles are referred to in relevant sections. Where available, protein shapes are derived from RCSB protein data bank (PDB) structures.

Complex I – NADH dehydrogenase (6ZR2), complex II – succinate dehydrogenase (1ZOY), complex III – cytochrome c reductase (1L0N), complex IV – cytochrome c oxidase (1OCC), complex V – ATP synthase (5ARA), cyt c – cytochrome c, Drp1 –dynamin-related protein 1 (4H1U), IMM – inner mitochondrial membrane, IMS – intermembrane space, OMM – outer mitochondrial membrane, Q – ubiquinone, ROS – reactive oxygen species, TCA cycle – tricarboxylic acid cycle

Fig. 5 Schematic representation of site-specific neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS-FTD spectrum.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS-FTD spectrum is represented by a blue-colored shapes with an arrow indicating increased or decreased activity or amount. The proteins represented in the figure include the proteins mentioned in this text, but further detailed review articles are referred to in relevant sections. Where available, protein shapes are derived from RCSB protein data bank (PDB) structures.

CHCHD10 – Coiled-Coil-Helix-Coiled-Coil-Helix Domain Containing protein 10, complex I – NADH dehydrogenase (6ZR2), complex II – succinate dehydrogenase (1ZOY), complex III – cytochrome c reductase (1L0N), complex IV – cytochrome c oxidase (1OCC), complex V – ATP synthase (5ARA), cyt c – cytochrome c, IMM – inner mitochondrial membrane, IMS – intermembrane space, OMM – outer mitochondrial membrane, Q – ubiquinone, ROS – reactive oxygen species, SOD1 – superoxide dismutase 1 (2APS, is usually present in the cytosol, but can also occur in the IMS), TCA cycle – tricarboxylic acid cycle, VDAC – voltage-dependent anion channel (2K4T).

Fig. 6 Graphical overview of therapeutic approaches to address mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.

Genetic or environmental challenges can result in increased reactive oxygen species production and decreased mitochondrial activity. Mitochondrial dysfunction can further act as a feed-forward cycle causing energetic failure and cellular dysfunction, which are hallmarks of neurodegenerative disease. Multiple approaches to treat mitochondrial dysfunction include transplanting/transferring healthy mitochondria into the damaged tissue or increasing the biogenesis of new undamaged mitochondria. Other approaches can reprogram metabolism to overcome barriers imposed by dysfunctional metabolic machinery or use small molecules to target outcomes of dysfunction.

ETC – respiratory chain, ROS – reactive oxygen species.

Table 1 Table of mitochondria-related therapies discussed in this review.

Name	Disease	Mechanism of Action	Number of Patients	Clinical Trial Phase	Result	ClinicalTrials ID	Reference	
acetyl-L-carnitine	ALS-FTD	fatty acids transport into the matrix	82 definite/probable ALS patients	Phase 2	well tolerated		(Beghi et al., 2013)	
DL-3-n-butylphthalide	AD	antioxidant	92 mild-to-moderate AD patients	Phase 2	slower cognitive decline	NCT02711683	(Wang et al., 2021)	
coenzyme Q10	PD	electron-carrier in ETC/antioxidant	600 early PD patients	Phase 3	no beneficial effect	NCT00740714	(Parkinson Study Group et al.,2014)	
HD	609 early HD patients	Phase 3	no beneficial effect	NCT00608881	(McGarry et al., 2017)	
ALS-FTD	185 ALS patients	Phase 2	no beneficial effect	NCT00243932	(Kaufmann et al., 2009)	
creatine monophosphate	PD	buffering intracellular energy stores	1741 early PD patients	Phase 3	terminated (futility)	NCT00449865	(Writing Group for the et al., 2015)	
ALS-FTD	175 (2003), 104 (2004) ALS patients	Phase 2	no beneficial effect		(Groeneveld et al., 2003; Shefner et al., 2004)	
Dexpramipexole	AD	antioxidant	20 mild-to-moderate AD patients	Phase 2	well tolerated	NCT01388478	(Bennett et al., 2016)	
ALS-FTD	mPTP inhibitor	942 early stage ALS patients	Phase 3	no beneficial effect	NCT01281189	(Cudkowicz et al., 2013)	
DNL-201	PD	LRRK2 inhibitor	29 PD patients	Phase 1	well tolerated	NCT03710707		
DNL-151	PD	LRRK2 inhibitor	36 PD patients	Phase 1	well tolerated	NCT04056689		
ethyl EPA	HD	antioxidant, neuroprotective	300 mild-to-moderate HD patients	Phase 3	no beneficial effect	NCT00146211	(Huntington Study Group, 2008)	
idebenone	HD	antioxidant	100 HD patients	Phase 2	no beneficial effect		(Ranen et al., 1996)	
isradipine	PD	calcium channel blocker	336 early PD patients	Phase 3	no beneficial effect	NCT02168842		
mitoQ	PD	electron-carrier in ETC	128 newly diagnosed PD patients	Phase 2	no beneficial effect	NCT00329056	(Snow et al., 2010)	
AD	early-to-mild AD patients	Not Applicable	recruiting	NCT03514875	(Shinn and Lagalwar, 2021)	
nilotinib	PD	kinases inhibitor	76 moderately advanced PD patients	Phase 2	no beneficial effect	NCT03205488	(Simuni et al., 2021)	
olexisome	ALS-FTD	mPTP inhibitor	512 probable or definite ALS patients	Phase 3	no beneficial effect	NCT00868166	(Lenglet et al., 2014)	
resveratrol	AD	activator of the deacetylase SIRT1	119 mild-to-moderate AD patients	Phase 2	decline in AD biomarkers	NCT01504854	(Sawda et al., 2017; Turner et al., 2015)	
HUFAs	HD	inhibition of dyskinesia	17 HD patients	Phase 2	motor fuction improvement		(Vaddadi et al., 2002)	
vitamin E	AD	antioxidant	613 mild-to-moderate AD patients	Phase 3	slower functional decline, varied	NCT00235716	(Dysken et al., 2014) (Lloret et al., 2009)	
HD	73 HD patients	Phase 2	no beneficial effect		(Peyser et al., 1995)	
ALS-FTD	160 probable or definite ALS patients		no beneficial effect		(Graf et al., 2005)	
AD - Alzheimer’s disease, ALS-FTD - Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration, EPA - eicosapentaenoic acid, HD - Huntington’s disease, PD - Parkinson’s disease, HUFAs - unsaturated fatty acids.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

7. Declarations of interest: None


8. References

Abrahams S , Goldstein LH , Simmons A , Brammer M , Williams SC , Giampietro V , Leigh PN , 2004. Word retrieval in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Brain 127 , 1507–1517.15163610
Abyadeh M , Gupta V , Chitranshi N , Gupta V , Wu Y , Saks D , Wander Wall R , Fitzhenry MJ , Basavarajappa D , You Y , Salekdeh GH , Haynes PA , Graham SL , Mirzaei M , 2021. Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease - a proteomics perspective. Expert Rev Proteomics 18 , 295–304.33874826
Adav SS , Park JE , Sze SK , 2019. Quantitative profiling brain proteomes revealed mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Brain 12 , 8.30691479
Al Amir Dache Z , Otandault A , Tanos R , Pastor B , Meddeb R , Sanchez C , Arena G , Lasorsa L , Bennett A , Grange T , El Messaoudi S , Mazard T , Prevostel C , Thierry AR , 2020. Blood contains circulating cell-free respiratory competent mitochondria. FASEB J 34 , 3616–3630.31957088
Alavian KN , Dworetzky SI , Bonanni L , Zhang P , Sacchetti S , Mariggio MA , Onofrj M , Thomas A , Li H , Mangold JE , Signore AP , Demarco U , Demady DR , Nabili P , Lazrove E , Smith PJ , Gribkoff VK , Jonas EA , 2012. Effects of dexpramipexole on brain mitochondrial conductances and cellular bioenergetic efficiency. Brain Res 1446 , 1–11.22364637
Angeles DC , Gan BH , Onstead L , Zhao Y , Lim KL , Dachsel J , Melrose H , Farrer M , Wszolek ZK , Dickson DW , Tan EK , 2011. Mutations in LRRK2 increase phosphorylation of peroxiredoxin 3 exacerbating oxidative stress-induced neuronal death. Hum Mutat 32 , 1390–1397.21850687
Angelova PR , Abramov AY , 2018. Role of mitochondrial ROS in the brain: from physiology to neurodegeneration. FEBS Lett 592 , 692–702.29292494
Annesi G , Savettieri G , Pugliese P , D’Amelio M , Tarantino P , Ragonese P , La Bella V , Piccoli T , Civitelli D , Annesi F , Fierro B , Piccoli F , Arabia G , Caracciolo M , Ciro Candiano IC , Quattrone A , 2005. DJ-1 mutations and parkinsonism-dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis complex. Ann Neurol 58 , 803–807.16240358
Antonenko YN , Roginsky VA , Pashkovskaya AA , Rokitskaya TI , Kotova EA , Zaspa AA , Chernyak BV , Skulachev VP , 2008. Protective effects of mitochondria-targeted antioxidant SkQ in aqueous and lipid membrane environments. J Membr Biol 222 , 141–149.18493812
Azeggagh S , Berwick DC , 2021. The development of inhibitors of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) as a therapeutic strategy for Parkinson’s disease: the current state of play. Br J Pharmacol.
Babenko VA , Silachev DN , Zorova LD , Pevzner IB , Khutornenko AA , Plotnikov EY , Sukhikh GT , Zorov DB , 2015. Improving the Post-Stroke Therapeutic Potency of Mesenchymal Multipotent Stromal Cells by Cocultivation With Cortical Neurons: The Role of Crosstalk Between Cells. Stem Cells Transl Med 4 , 1011–1020.26160961
Baek SH , Park SJ , Jeong JI , Kim SH , Han J , Kyung JW , Baik SH , Choi Y , Choi BY , Park JS , Bahn G , Shin JH , Jo DS , Lee JY , Jang CG , Arumugam TV , Kim J , Han JW , Koh JY , Cho DH , Jo DG , 2017. Inhibition of Drp1 Ameliorates Synaptic Depression, Abeta Deposition, and Cognitive Impairment in an Alzheimer’s Disease Model. J Neurosci 37 , 5099–5110.28432138
Bahadorani S , Cho J , Lo T , Contreras H , Lawal HO , Krantz DE , Bradley TJ , Walker DW , 2010. Neuronal expression of a single-subunit yeast NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Ndi1) extends Drosophila lifespan. Aging Cell 9 , 191–202.20089120
Ballard PA , Tetrud JW , Langston JW , 1985. Permanent human parkinsonism due to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP): seven cases. Neurology 35 , 949–956.3874373
Bartzokis G , Lu PH , Tishler TA , Fong SM , Oluwadara B , Finn JP , Huang D , Bordelon Y , Mintz J , Perlman S , 2007. Myelin breakdown and iron changes in Huntington’s disease: pathogenesis and treatment implications. Neurochem Res 32 , 1655–1664.17484051
Beck SJ , Guo L , Phensy A , Tian J , Wang L , Tandon N , Gauba E , Lu L , Pascual JM , Kroener S , Du H , 2016. Deregulation of mitochondrial F1FO-ATP synthase via OSCP in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 7 , 11483.27151236
Beghi E , Pupillo E , Bonito V , Buzzi P , Caponnetto C , Chio A , Corbo M , Giannini F , Inghilleri M , Bella VL , Logroscino G , Lorusso L , Lunetta C , Mazzini L , Messina P , Mora G , Perini M , Quadrelli ML , Silani V , Simone IL , Tremolizzo L , Italian ALSSG , 2013. Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial of acetyl-L-carnitine for ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 14 , 397–405.23421600
Bennett J , Burns J , Welch P , Bothwell R , 2016. Safety and Tolerability of R(+) Pramipexole in Mild-to-Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 49 , 1179–1187.26682692
Berry BJ , Baldzizhar A , Nieves TO , Wojtovich AP , 2020a. Neuronal AMPK coordinates mitochondrial energy sensing and hypoxia resistance in C. elegans. FASEB J 34 , 16333–16347.33058299
Berry BJ , Trewin AJ , Amitrano AM , Kim M , Wojtovich AP , 2018. Use the Protonmotive Force: Mitochondrial Uncoupling and Reactive Oxygen Species. J Mol Biol 430 , 3873–3891.29626541
Berry BJ , Trewin AJ , Milliken AS , Baldzizhar A , Amitrano AM , Lim Y , Kim M , Wojtovich AP , 2020b. Optogenetic control of mitochondrial protonmotive force to impact cellular stress resistance. EMBO Rep 21 , e49113.32043300
Betarbet R , Sherer TB , MacKenzie G , Garcia-Osuna M , Panov AV , Greenamyre JT , 2000. Chronic systemic pesticide exposure reproduces features of Parkinson’s disease. Nat Neurosci 3 , 1301–1306.11100151
Bido S , Soria FN , Fan RZ , Bezard E , Tieu K , 2017. Mitochondrial division inhibitor-1 is neuroprotective in the A53T-alpha-synuclein rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Sci Rep 7 , 7495.28790323
Birk AV , Chao WM , Bracken C , Warren JD , Szeto HH , 2014. Targeting mitochondrial cardiolipin and the cytochrome c/cardiolipin complex to promote electron transport and optimize mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Br J Pharmacol 171 , 2017–2028.24134698
Birks J , 2006. Cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer’s disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD005593.16437532
Bloem BR , de Vries NM , Ebersbach G , 2015. Nonpharmacological treatments for patients with Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 30 , 1504–1520.26274930
Bonifati V , Rizzu P , Squitieri F , Krieger E , Vanacore N , van Swieten JC , Brice A , van Duijn CM , Oostra B , Meco G , Heutink P , 2003. DJ-1( PARK7), a novel gene for autosomal recessive, early onset parkinsonism. Neurol Sci 24 , 159–160.14598065
Bono-Yague J , Gomez-Escribano AP , Millan JM , Vazquez-Manrique RP , 2020. Reactive Species in Huntington Disease: Are They Really the Radicals You Want to Catch? Antioxidants (Basel) 9 .
Bordt EA , Clerc P , Roelofs BA , Saladino AJ , Tretter L , Adam-Vizi V , Cherok E , Khalil A , Yadava N , Ge SX , Francis TC , Kennedy NW , Picton LK , Kumar T , Uppuluri S , Miller AM , Itoh K , Karbowski M , Sesaki H , Hill RB , Polster BM , 2017. The Putative Drp1 Inhibitor mdivi-1 Is a Reversible Mitochondrial Complex I Inhibitor that Modulates Reactive Oxygen Species. Dev Cell 40 , 583–594 e586.28350990
Borlongan CV , Koutouzis TK , Sanberg PR , 1997. 3-Nitropropionic acid animal model and Huntington’s disease. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 21 , 289–293.9168265
Borthwick GM , Taylor RW , Walls TJ , Tonska K , Taylor GA , Shaw PJ , Ince PG , Turnbull DM , 2006. Motor neuron disease in a patient with a mitochondrial tRNAIle mutation. Ann Neurol 59 , 570–574.16358336
Boukelmoune N , Chiu GS , Kavelaars A , Heijnen CJ , 2018. Mitochondrial transfer from mesenchymal stem cells to neural stem cells protects against the neurotoxic effects of cisplatin. Acta Neuropathol Commun 6 , 139.30541620
Boylan K , 2015. Familial Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Neurol Clin 33 , 807–830.26515623
Braak H , Braak E , 1991. Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol 82 , 239–259.1759558
Brand MD , Goncalves RL , Orr AL , Vargas L , Gerencser AA , Borch Jensen M , Wang YT , Melov S , Turk CN , Matzen JT , Dardov VJ , Petrassi HM , Meeusen SL , Perevoshchikova IV , Jasper H , Brookes PS , Ainscow EK , 2016. Suppressors of Superoxide-H2O2 Production at Site IQ of Mitochondrial Complex I Protect against Stem Cell Hyperplasia and Ischemia-Reperfusion Injury. Cell Metab 24 , 582–592.27667666
Brown MR , Sullivan PG , Geddes JW , 2006. Synaptic mitochondria are more susceptible to Ca2+overload than nonsynaptic mitochondria. J Biol Chem 281 , 11658–11668.16517608
Browne SE , Bowling AC , MacGarvey U , Baik MJ , Berger SC , Muqit MM , Bird ED , Beal MF , 1997. Oxidative damage and metabolic dysfunction in Huntington’s disease: selective vulnerability of the basal ganglia. Ann Neurol 41 , 646–653.9153527
Butterfield DA , Bader Lange ML , Sultana R , 2010. Involvements of the lipid peroxidation product, HNE, in the pathogenesis and progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 1801 , 924–929.20176130
Butterfield DA , Boyd-Kimball D , 2019. Redox proteomics and amyloid beta-peptide: insights into Alzheimer disease. J Neurochem 151 , 459–487.30216447
Butterfield DA , Reed T , Sultana R , 2011. Roles of 3-nitrotyrosine- and 4-hydroxynonenal-modified brain proteins in the progression and pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Free Radic Res 45 , 59–72.20942567
Butterfield DA , Reed TT , Perluigi M , De Marco C , Coccia R , Keller JN , Markesbery WR , Sultana R , 2007. Elevated levels of 3-nitrotyrosine in brain from subjects with amnestic mild cognitive impairment: implications for the role of nitration in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res 1148 , 243–248.17395167
Cannon JR , Tapias V , Na HM , Honick AS , Drolet RE , Greenamyre JT , 2009. A highly reproducible rotenone model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 34 , 279–290.19385059
Castegna A , Aksenov M , Aksenova M , Thongboonkerd V , Klein JB , Pierce WM , Booze R , Markesbery WR , Butterfield DA , 2002. Proteomic identification of oxidatively modified proteins in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Part I: creatine kinase BB, glutamine synthase, and ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L-1. Free Radic Biol Med 33 , 562–571.12160938
Cattaneo E , Zuccato C , Tartari M , 2005. Normal huntingtin function: an alternative approach to Huntington’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 6 , 919–930.16288298
Cenini G , Lloret A , Cascella R , 2019. Oxidative Stress in Neurodegenerative Diseases: From a Mitochondrial Point of View. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2019 , 2105607.
Chai YL , Xing H , Chong JR , Francis PT , Ballard CG , Chen CP , Lai MKP , 2018. Mitochondrial Translocase of the Outer Membrane Alterations May Underlie Dysfunctional Oxidative Phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 61 , 793–801.29254089
Chan DC , 2020. Mitochondrial Dynamics and Its Involvement in Disease. Annu Rev Pathol 15 , 235–259.31585519
Chen R , Gore F , Nguyen QA , Ramakrishnan C , Patel S , Kim SH , Raffiee M , Kim YS , Hsueh B , Krook-Magnusson E , Soltesz I , Deisseroth K , 2021. Deep brain optogenetics without intracranial surgery. Nat Biotechnol 39 , 161–164.33020604
Chen S , Weitemier AZ , Zeng X , He L , Wang X , Tao Y , Huang AJY , Hashimotodani Y , Kano M , Iwasaki H , Parajuli LK , Okabe S , Teh DBL , All AH , Tsutsui-Kimura I , Tanaka KF , Liu X , McHugh TJ , 2018. Near-infrared deep brain stimulation via upconversion nanoparticle-mediated optogenetics. Science 359 , 679–684.29439241
Chen X , Guo C , Kong J , 2012. Oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. Neural Regen Res 7 , 376–385.25774178
Cheng XY , Biswas S , Li J , Mao CJ , Chechneva O , Chen J , Li K , Li J , Zhang JR , Liu CF , Deng WB , 2020. Human iPSCs derived astrocytes rescue rotenone-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and dopaminergic neurodegeneration in vitro by donating functional mitochondria. Transl Neurodegener 9 , 13.32345341
Chettih SN , Harvey CD , 2019. Single-neuron perturbations reveal feature-specific competition in V1. Nature 567 , 334–340.30842660
Chung CL , Thilarajah S , Tan D , 2016. Effectiveness of resistance training on muscle strength and physical function in people with Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. ClinRehabil 30 , 11–23.
Cieri D , Vicario M , Vallese F , D’Orsi B , Berto P , Grinzato A , Catoni C , De Stefani D , Rizzuto R , Brini M , Cali T , 2018. Tau localises within mitochondrial sub-compartments and its caspase cleavage affects ER-mitochondria interactions and cellular Ca(2+) handling. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 1864 , 3247–3256.30006151
Coskun P , Wyrembak J , Schriner SE , Chen HW , Marciniack C , Laferla F , Wallace DC , 2012. A mitochondrial etiology of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease. Biochim Biophys Acta 1820 , 553–564.21871538
Cowan DB , Yao R , Akurathi V , Snay ER , Thedsanamoorthy JK , Zurakowski D , Ericsson M , Friehs I , Wu Y , Levitsky S , Del Nido PJ , Packard AB , McCully JD , 2016. Intracoronary Delivery of Mitochondria to the Ischemic Heart for Cardioprotection. PLoS One 11 , e0160889.27500955
Cozzolino M , Carri MT , 2012. Mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS. Prog Neurobiol 97 , 54–66.21827820
Cozzolino M , Rossi S , Mirra A , Carri MT , 2015. Mitochondrial dynamism and the pathogenesis of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Front Cell Neurosci 9 , 31.25713513
Crugnola V , Lamperti C , Lucchini V , Ronchi D , Peverelli L , Prelle A , Sciacco M , Bordoni A , Fassone E , Fortunato F , Corti S , Silani V , Bresolin N , Di Mauro S , Comi GP , Moggio M , 2010. Mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction in muscle from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol 67 , 849–854.20625092
Cudkowicz M , Bozik ME , Ingersoll EW , Miller R , Mitsumoto H , Shefner J , Moore DH , Schoenfeld D , Mather JL , Archibald D , Sullivan M , Amburgey C , Moritz J , Gribkoff VK , 2011. The effects of dexpramipexole (KNS-760704) in individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Med 17 , 1652–1656.22101764
Cudkowicz ME , van den Berg LH , Shefner JM , Mitsumoto H , Mora JS , Ludolph A , Hardiman O , Bozik ME , Ingersoll EW , Archibald D , Meyers AL , Dong Y , Farwell WR , Kerr DA , investigators E , 2013. Dexpramipexole versus placebo for patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (EMPOWER): a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Neurol 12 , 1059–1067.24067398
Dai W , Shi J , Gupta RC , Sabbah HN , Hale SL , Kloner RA , 2014. Bendavia, a mitochondria-targeting peptide, improves postinfarction cardiac function, prevents adverse left ventricular remodeling, and restores mitochondria-related gene expression in rats. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 64 , 543–553.25165999
David DC , Hauptmann S , Scherping I , Schuessel K , Keil U , Rizzu P , Ravid R , Drose S , Brandt U , Muller WE , Eckert A , Gotz J , 2005. Proteomic and functional analyses reveal a mitochondrial dysfunction in P301L tau transgenic mice. J Biol Chem 280 , 23802–23814.15831501
de Mattos JP , Alencar A , da Silva AG , Fonseca ME , 1989. [Ultrastructural aspects of Parkinson disease]. Arq Neuropsiquiatr 47 , 430–437.2634384
Del Prete D , Suski JM , Oules B , Debayle D , Gay AS , Lacas-Gervais S , Bussiere R , Bauer C , Pinton P , Paterlini-Brechot P , Wieckowski MR , Checler F , Chami M , 2017. Localization and Processing of the Amyloid-beta Protein Precursor in Mitochondria-Associated Membranes. J Alzheimers Dis 55 , 1549–1570.27911326
Detmer SA , Chan DC , 2007. Functions and dysfunctions of mitochondrial dynamics. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 , 870–879.17928812
Dexter DT , Carayon A , Javoy-Agid F , Agid Y , Wells FR , Daniel SE , Lees AJ , Jenner P , Marsden CD , 1991. Alterations in the levels of iron, ferritin and other trace metals in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative diseases affecting the basal ganglia. Brain 114 ( Pt 4 ), 1953–1975.1832073
Di Maio R , Barrett PJ , Hoffman EK , Barrett CW , Zharikov A , Borah A , Hu X , McCoy J , Chu CT , Burton EA , Hastings TG , Greenamyre JT , 2016. alpha-Synuclein binds to TOM20 and inhibits mitochondrial protein import in Parkinson’s disease. Sci Transl Med 8 , 342ra378.
Dolgacheva LP , Berezhnov AV , Fedotova EI , Zinchenko VP , Abramov AY , 2019. Role of DJ-1 in the mechanism of pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. J Bioenerg Biomembr 51 , 175–188.31054074
Doulamis IP , McCully JD , 2021. Mitochondrial Transplantation for Ischemia Reperfusion Injury. Methods Mol Biol 2277 , 15–37.34080142
Doyle LM , Wang MZ , 2019. Overview of Extracellular Vesicles, Their Origin, Composition, Purpose, and Methods for Exosome Isolation and Analysis. Cells 8 .
Drolet RE , Cannon JR , Montero L , Greenamyre JT , 2009. Chronic rotenone exposure reproduces Parkinson’s disease gastrointestinal neuropathology. Neurobiol Dis 36 , 96–102.19595768
Dysken MW , Sano M , Asthana S , Vertrees JE , Pallaki M , Llorente M , Love S , Schellenberg GD , McCarten JR , Malphurs J , Prieto S , Chen P , Loreck DJ , Trapp G , Bakshi RS , Mintzer JE , Heidebrink JL , Vidal-Cardona A , Arroyo LM , Cruz AR , Zachariah S , Kowall NW , Chopra MP , Craft S , Thielke S , Turvey CL , Woodman C , Monnell KA , Gordon K , Tomaska J , Segal Y , Peduzzi PN , Guarino PD , 2014. Effect of vitamin E and memantine on functional decline in Alzheimer disease: the TEAM-AD VA cooperative randomized trial. JAMA 311 , 33–44.24381967
Emani SM , McCully JD , 2018. Mitochondrial transplantation: applications for pediatric patients with congenital heart disease. Transl Pediatr 7 , 169–175.29770298
English K , Shepherd A , Uzor NE , Trinh R , Kavelaars A , Heijnen CJ , 2020. Astrocytes rescue neuronal health after cisplatin treatment through mitochondrial transfer. Acta Neuropathol Commun 8 , 36.32197663
Esteves AR , Arduino DM , Swerdlow RH , Oliveira CR , Cardoso SM , 2009. Oxidative stress involvement in alpha-synuclein oligomerization in Parkinson’s disease cybrids. Antioxid Redox Signal 11 , 439–448.18717628
Fan RZ , Guo M , Luo S , Cui M , Tieu K , 2019. Exosome release and neuropathology induced by alpha-synuclein: new insights into protective mechanisms of Drp1 inhibition. Acta Neuropathol Commun 7 , 184.31744532
Ferrari R , Kapogiannis D , Huey ED , Momeni P , 2011. FTD and ALS: a tale of two diseases. Curr Alzheimer Res 8 , 273–294.21222600
Finger EC , 2016. Frontotemporal Dementias. Continuum (Minneap Minn) 22 , 464–489.27042904
Finsterer J , 2003. Mitochondriopathy mimicking amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurologist 9 , 45–48.12801431
Frackowiak RS , Pozzilli C , Legg NJ , Du Boulay GH , Marshall J , Lenzi GL , Jones T , 1981. Regional cerebral oxygen supply and utilization in dementia. A clinical and physiological study with oxygen-15 and positron tomography. Brain 104 , 753–778.6976816
Franco R , Rivas-Santisteban R , Navarro G , Pinna A , Reyes-Resina I , 2021. Genes Implicated in Familial Parkinson’s Disease Provide a Dual Picture of Nigral Dopaminergic Neurodegeneration with Mitochondria Taking Center Stage. Int J Mol Sci 22 .
Fukuyama H , Ogawa M , Yamauchi H , Yamaguchi S , Kimura J , Yonekura Y , Konishi J , 1994. Altered cerebral energy metabolism in Alzheimer’s disease: a PET study. J Nucl Med 35 , 1–6.8271029
Gandhi S , Wood-Kaczmar A , Yao Z , Plun-Favreau H , Deas E , Klupsch K , Downward J , Latchman DS , Tabrizi SJ , Wood NW , Duchen MR , Abramov AY , 2009. PINK1-associated Parkinson’s disease is caused by neuronal vulnerability to calcium-induced cell death. Mol Cell 33 , 627–638.19285945
Ge P , Dawson VL , Dawson TM , 2020. PINK1 and Parkin mitochondrial quality control: a source of regional vulnerability in Parkinson’s disease. Mol Neurodegener 15 , 20.32169097
Gialluisi A , Reccia MG , Modugno N , Nutile T , Lombardi A , Di Giovannantonio LG , Pietracupa S , Ruggiero D , Scala S , Gambardella S , International Parkinson’s Disease Genomics, C., Iacoviello L , Gianfrancesco F , Acampora D , D’Esposito M , Simeone A , Ciullo M , Esposito T , 2021. Identification of sixteen novel candidate genes for late onset Parkinson’s disease. Mol Neurodegener 16 , 35.34148545
Gibson GE , Starkov A , Blass JP , Ratan RR , Beal MF , 2010. Cause and consequence: mitochondrial dysfunction initiates and propagates neuronal dysfunction, neuronal death and behavioral abnormalities in age-associated neurodegenerative diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta 1802 , 122–134.19715758
Gibson GE , Zhang H , Sheu KF , Bogdanovich N , Lindsay JG , Lannfelt L , Vestling M , Cowburn RF , 1998. Alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase in Alzheimer brains bearing the APP670/671 mutation. Ann Neurol 44 , 676–681.9778267
Gollihue JL , Patel SP , Eldahan KC , Cox DH , Donahue RR , Taylor BK , Sullivan PG , Rabchevsky AG , 2018. Effects of Mitochondrial Transplantation on Bioenergetics, Cellular Incorporation, and Functional Recovery after Spinal Cord Injury. J Neurotrauma 35 , 1800–1818.29648982
Golpich M , Amini E , Mohamed Z , Azman Ali R , Mohamed Ibrahim N , Ahmadiani A , 2017. Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Biogenesis in Neurodegenerative diseases: Pathogenesis and Treatment. CNS Neurosci Ther 23 , 5–22.27873462
Gong X , Mendoza-Halliday D , Ting JT , Kaiser T , Sun X , Bastos AM , Wimmer RD , Guo B , Chen Q , Zhou Y , Pruner M , Wu CW , Park D , Deisseroth K , Barak B , Boyden ES , Miller EK , Halassa MM , Fu Z , Bi G , Desimone R , Feng G , 2020. An Ultra-Sensitive Step-Function Opsin for Minimally Invasive Optogenetic Stimulation in Mice and Macaques. Neuron 107 , 197.32645306
Goodman L , 1953. Alzheimer’s disease; a clinico-pathologic analysis of twenty-three cases with a theory on pathogenesis. J Nerv Ment Dis 118 , 97–130.13109530
Graf M , Ecker D , Horowski R , Kramer B , Riederer P , Gerlach M , Hager C , Ludolph AC , Becker G , Osterhage J , Jost WH , Schrank B , Stein C , Kostopulos P , Lubik S , Wekwerth K , Dengler R , Troeger M , Wuerz A , Hoge A , Schrader C , Schimke N , Krampfl K , Petri S , Zierz S , Eger K , Neudecker S , Traufeller K , Sievert M , Neundorfer B , Hecht M , German vitamin, E.A.L.S.S.G., 2005. High dose vitamin E therapy in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as add-on therapy to riluzole: results of a placebo-controlled double-blind study. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 112 , 649–660.15517433
Grajales-Reyes JG , Copits BA , Lie F , Yu Y , Avila R , Vogt SK , Huang Y , Banks AR , Rogers JA , Gereau R.W.t. , Golden JP , 2021. Surgical implantation of wireless, battery-free optoelectronic epidural implants for optogenetic manipulation of spinal cord circuits in mice. Nat Protoc 16 , 3072–3088.34031611
Groeneveld GJ , Veldink JH , van der Tweel I , Kalmijn S , Beijer C , de Visser M , Wokke JH , Franssen H , van den Berg LH , 2003. A randomized sequential trial of creatine in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 53 , 437–445.12666111
Grohm J , Kim SW , Mamrak U , Tobaben S , Cassidy-Stone A , Nunnari J , Plesnila N , Culmsee C , 2012. Inhibition of Drp1 provides neuroprotection in vitro and in vivo. Cell Death Differ 19 , 1446–1458.22388349
Guardia-Laguarta C , Area-Gomez E , Rub C , Liu Y , Magrane J , Becker D , Voos W , Schon EA , Przedborski S , 2014. alpha-Synuclein is localized to mitochondria-associated ER membranes. J Neurosci 34 , 249–259.24381286
Guardia-Laguarta C , Area-Gomez E , Schon EA , Przedborski S , 2015. A new role for alpha-synuclein in Parkinson’s disease: Alteration of ER-mitochondrial communication. Mov Disord 30 , 1026–1033.25952565
Guha S , Fischer S , Johnson GVW , Nehrke K , 2020. Tauopathy-associated tau modifications selectively impact neurodegeneration and mitophagy in a novel C. elegans single-copy transgenic model. Mol Neurodegener 15 , 65.33168053
Hall CN , Klein-Flugge MC , Howarth C , Attwell D , 2012. Oxidative phosphorylation, not glycolysis, powers presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms underlying brain information processing. J Neurosci 32 , 8940–8951.22745494
Hamblin MR , 2016. Shining light on the head: Photobiomodulation for brain disorders. BBA Clin 6 , 113–124.27752476
Hardy JA , Higgins GA , 1992. Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis. Science 256 , 184–185.1566067
Hattingen E , Magerkurth J , Pilatus U , Mozer A , Seifried C , Steinmetz H , Zanella F , Hilker R , 2009. Phosphorus and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy demonstrates mitochondrial dysfunction in early and advanced Parkinson’s disease. Brain 132 , 3285–3297.19952056
Hayakawa K , Esposito E , Wang X , Terasaki Y , Liu Y , Xing C , Ji X , Lo EH , 2016. Transfer of mitochondria from astrocytes to neurons after stroke. Nature 535 , 551–555.27466127
Hayashi T , Rizzuto R , Hajnoczky G , Su TP , 2009. MAM: more than just a housekeeper. Trends Cell Biol 19 , 81–88.19144519
Henshaw R , Jenkins BG , Schulz JB , Ferrante RJ , Kowall NW , Rosen BR , Beal MF , 1994. Malonate produces striatal lesions by indirect NMDA receptor activation. Brain Res 647 , 161–166.8069700
Hirai K , Aliev G , Nunomura A , Fujioka H , Russell RL , Atwood CS , Johnson AB , Kress Y , Vinters HV , Tabaton M , Shimohama S , Cash AD , Siedlak SL , Harris PL , Jones PK , Petersen RB , Perry G , Smith MA , 2001. Mitochondrial abnormalities in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 21 , 3017–3023.11312286
Hsieh CH , Shaltouki A , Gonzalez AE , Bettencourt da Cruz A , Burbulla LF , St Lawrence E , Schule B , Krainc D , Palmer TD , Wang X , 2016. Functional Impairment in Miro Degradation and Mitophagy Is a Shared Feature in Familial and Sporadic Parkinson’s Disease. Cell Stem Cell 19 , 709–724.27618216
Hu Y , Li XC , Wang ZH , Luo Y , Zhang X , Liu XP , Feng Q , Wang Q , Yue Z , Chen Z , Ye K , Wang JZ , Liu GP , 2016. Tau accumulation impairs mitophagy via increasing mitochondrial membrane potential and reducing mitochondrial Parkin. Oncotarget 7 , 17356–17368.26943044
Huntington Study Group, T.-H.D.I., 2008. Randomized controlled trial of ethyl-eicosapentaenoic acid in Huntington disease: the TREND-HD study. Arch Neurol 65 , 1582–1589.19064745
Imai Y , Inoshita T , Meng H , Shiba-Fukushima K , Hara KY , Sawamura N , Hattori N , 2019. Light-driven activation of mitochondrial proton-motive force improves motor behaviors in a Drosophila model of Parkinson’s disease. Commun Biol 2 , 424.31799427
Ingelsson M , Fukumoto H , Newell KL , Growdon JH , Hedley-Whyte ET , Frosch MP , Albert MS , Hyman BT , Irizarry MC , 2004. Early Abeta accumulation and progressive synaptic loss, gliosis, and tangle formation in AD brain. Neurology 62 , 925–931.15037694
Iwata R , Casimir P , Vanderhaeghen P , 2020. Mitochondrial dynamics in postmitotic cells regulate neurogenesis. Science 369 , 858–862.32792401
Jackman SL , Chen CH , Offermann HL , Drew IR , Harrison BM , Bowman AM , Flick KM , Flaquer I , Regehr WG , 2020. Cerebellar Purkinje cell activity modulates aggressive behavior. Elife 9 .
Jacobs D , Hoogerheide DP , Rovini A , Jiang Z , Lee JC , Rostovtseva TK , Bezrukov SM , 2019. Probing Membrane Association of alpha-Synuclein Domains with VDAC Nanopore Reveals Unexpected Binding Pattern. Sci Rep 9 , 4580.30872688
Jadiya P , Kolmetzky DW , Tomar D , Di Meco A , Lombardi AA , Lambert JP , Luongo TS , Ludtmann MH , Pratico D , Elrod JW , 2019. Impaired mitochondrial calcium efflux contributes to disease progression in models of Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 10 , 3885.31467276
Jesse S , Bayer H , Alupei MC , Zugel M , Mulaw M , Tuorto F , Malmsheimer S , Singh K , Steinacker J , Schumann U , Ludolph AC , Scharffetter-Kochanek K , Witting A , Weydt P , Iben S , 2017. Ribosomal transcription is regulated by PGC-1alpha and disturbed in Huntington’s disease. Sci Rep 7 , 8513.28819135
Johnson ECB , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Ping L , Zhou M , Yin L , Higginbotham LA , Guajardo A , White B , Troncoso JC , Thambisetty M , Montine TJ , Lee EB , Trojanowski JQ , Beach TG , Reiman EM , Haroutunian V , Wang M , Schadt E , Zhang B , Dickson DW , Ertekin-Taner N , Golde TE , Petyuk VA , De Jager PL , Bennett DA , Wingo TS , Rangaraju S , Hajjar I , Shulman JM , Lah JJ , Levey AI , Seyfried NT , 2020. Large-scale proteomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain and cerebrospinal fluid reveals early changes in energy metabolism associated with microglia and astrocyte activation. Nat Med 26 , 769–780.32284590
Johnson JK , Diehl J , Mendez MF , Neuhaus J , Shapira JS , Forman M , Chute DJ , Roberson ED , Pace-Savitsky C , Neumann M , Chow TW , Rosen HJ , Forstl H , Kurz A , Miller BL , 2005. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: demographic characteristics of 353 patients. Arch Neurol 62 , 925–930.15956163
Johnston W , Karpati G , Carpenter S , Arnold D , Shoubridge EA , 1995. Late-onset mitochondrial myopathy. Ann Neurol 37 , 16–23.7818252
Johri A , Chandra A , Flint Beal M , 2013. PGC-1alpha, mitochondrial dysfunction, and Huntington’s disease. Free Radic Biol Med 62 , 37–46.23602910
Joshi AU , Mochly-Rosen D , 2018. Mortal engines: Mitochondrial bioenergetics and dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases. Pharmacol Res 138 , 2–15.30144530
Jung H , Kim SY , Canbakis Cecen FS , Cho Y , Kwon SK , 2020. Dysfunction of Mitochondrial Ca(2+) Regulatory Machineries in Brain Aging and Neurodegenerative Diseases. Front Cell Dev Biol 8 , 599792.33392190
Kann O , Kovacs R , 2007. Mitochondria and neuronal activity. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 292 , C641–657.17092996
Karuppagounder SS , Brahmachari S , Lee Y , Dawson VL , Dawson TM , Ko HS , 2014. The c-Abl inhibitor, nilotinib, protects dopaminergic neurons in a preclinical animal model of Parkinson’s disease. Sci Rep 4 , 4874.24786396
Kaufmann P , Thompson JL , Levy G , Buchsbaum R , Shefner J , Krivickas LS , Katz J , Rollins Y , Barohn RJ , Jackson CE , Tiryaki E , Lomen-Hoerth C , Armon C , Tandan R , Rudnicki SA , Rezania K , Sufit R , Pestronk A , Novella SP , Heiman-Patterson T , Kasarskis EJ , Pioro EP , Montes J , Arbing R , Vecchio D , Barsdorf A , Mitsumoto H , Levin B , Group Q.S., 2009. Phase II trial of CoQ10 for ALS finds insufficient evidence to justify phase III. Ann Neurol 66 , 235–244.19743457
Kee TR , Espinoza Gonzalez P , Wehinger JL , Bukhari MZ , Ermekbaeva A , Sista A , Kotsiviras P , Liu T , Kang DE , Woo JA , 2021. Mitochondrial CHCHD2: Disease-Associated Mutations, Physiological Functions, and Current Animal Models. Front Aging Neurosci 13 , 660843.33967741
Kelso GF , Porteous CM , Coulter CV , Hughes G , Porteous WK , Ledgerwood EC , Smith RA , Murphy MP , 2001. Selective targeting of a redox-active ubiquinone to mitochondria within cells: antioxidant and antiapoptotic properties. J Biol Chem 276 , 4588–4596.11092892
Kish SJ , Bergeron C , Rajput A , Dozic S , Mastrogiacomo F , Chang LJ , Wilson JM , DiStefano LM , Nobrega JN , 1992. Brain cytochrome oxidase in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 59 , 776–779.1321237
Kleele T , Rey T , Winter J , Zaganelli S , Mahecic D , Perreten Lambert H , Ruberto FP , Nemir M , Wai T , Pedrazzini T , Manley S , 2021. Distinct fission signatures predict mitochondrial degradation or biogenesis. Nature 593 , 435–439.33953403
Knopman DS , Amieva H , Petersen RC , Chetelat G , Holtzman DM , Hyman BT , Nixon RA , Jones DT , 2021. Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers 7 , 33.33986301
Knopman DS , Roberts RO , 2011. Estimating the number of persons with frontotemporal lobar degeneration in the US population. J Mol Neurosci 45 , 330–335.21584654
Kumar S , Karmacharya M , Michael IJ , Choi Y , Kim J , Kim I , Cho YK , 2021. Programmed exosome fusion for energy generation in living cells. Nat Catal.
Lau DHW , Hartopp N , Welsh NJ , Mueller S , Glennon EB , Morotz GM , Annibali A , Gomez-Suaga P , Stoica R , Paillusson S , Miller CCJ , 2018. Disruption of ER-mitochondria signalling in fronto-temporal dementia and related amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Cell Death Dis 9 , 327.29491392
Lee D , Hyun JH , Jung K , Hannan P , Kwon HB , 2017. A calcium- and light-gated switch to induce gene expression in activated neurons. Nat Biotechnol 35 , 858–863.28650460
Lee KS , Huh S , Lee S , Wu Z , Kim AK , Kang HY , Lu B , 2018. Altered ER-mitochondria contact impacts mitochondria calcium homeostasis and contributes to neurodegeneration in vivo in disease models. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115 , E8844–E8853.30185553
Lenglet T , Lacomblez L , Abitbol JL , Ludolph A , Mora JS , Robberecht W , Shaw PJ , Pruss RM , Cuvier V , Meininger V , Mitotarget study, g., 2014. A phase II-III trial of olesoxime in subjects with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Eur J Neurol 21 , 529–536.24447620
LeWitt PA , 2015. Levodopa therapy for Parkinson’s disease: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Mov Disord 30 , 64–72.25449210
Li H , Wang C , He T , Zhao T , Chen YY , Shen YL , Zhang X , Wang LL , 2019. Mitochondrial Transfer from Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells to Motor Neurons in Spinal Cord Injury Rats via Gap Junction. Theranostics 9 , 2017–2035.31037154
Liang H , Ward WF , 2006. PGC-1alpha: a key regulator of energy metabolism. Adv Physiol Educ 30 , 145–151.17108241
Liang WS , Reiman EM , Valla J , Dunckley T , Beach TG , Grover A , Niedzielko TL , Schneider LE , Mastroeni D , Caselli R , Kukull W , Morris JC , Hulette CM , Schmechel D , Rogers J , Stephan DA , 2008. Alzheimer’s disease is associated with reduced expression of energy metabolism genes in posterior cingulate neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105 , 4441–4446.18332434
Lightowlers RN , Chrzanowska-Lightowlers ZM , Russell OM , 2020. Mitochondrial transplantation-a possible therapeutic for mitochondrial dysfunction?: Mitochondrial transfer is a potential cure for many diseases but proof of efficacy and safety is still lacking. EMBO Rep 21 , e50964.32852136
Lill CM , 2016. Genetics of Parkinson’s disease. Mol Cell Probes 30 , 386–396.27818248
Lin BC , Phung TH , Higgins NR , Greenslade JE , Prado MA , Finley D , Karbowski M , Polster BM , Monteiro MJ , 2021. ALS/FTD mutations in UBQLN2 are linked to mitochondrial dysfunction through loss-of-function in mitochondrial protein import. Hum Mol Genet 30 , 1230–1246.33891006
Lipton AM , White CL 3rd , Bigio EH , 2004. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with motor neuron disease-type inclusions predominates in 76 cases of frontotemporal degeneration. Acta Neuropathol 108 , 379–385.15351890
Liscic RM , Alberici A , Cairns NJ , Romano M , Buratti E , 2020. From basic research to the clinic: innovative therapies for ALS and FTD in the pipeline. Mol Neurodegener 15 , 31.32487123
Liu J , Liu W , Li R , Yang H , 2019a. Mitophagy in Parkinson’s Disease: From Pathogenesis to Treatment. Cells 8 .
Liu PP , Xie Y , Meng XY , Kang JS , 2019b. History and progress of hypotheses and clinical trials for Alzheimer’s disease. Signal Transduct Target Ther 4 , 29.31637009
Lloret A , Badia MC , Mora NJ , Pallardo FV , Alonso MD , Vina J , 2009. Vitamin E paradox in Alzheimer’s disease: it does not prevent loss of cognition and may even be detrimental. J Alzheimers Dis 17 , 143–149.19494439
Loson OC , Song Z , Chen H , Chan DC , 2013. Fis1, Mff, MiD49, and MiD51 mediate Drp1 recruitment in mitochondrial fission. Mol Biol Cell 24 , 659–667.23283981
Ludtmann MHR , Angelova PR , Horrocks MH , Choi ML , Rodrigues M , Baev AY , Berezhnov AV , Yao Z , Little D , Banushi B , Al-Menhali AS , Ranasinghe RT , Whiten DR , Yapom R , Dolt KS , Devine MJ , Gissen P , Kunath T , Jaganjac M , Pavlov EV , Klenerman D , Abramov AY , Gandhi S , 2018. alpha-synuclein oligomers interact with ATP synthase and open the permeability transition pore in Parkinson’s disease. Nat Commun 9 , 2293.29895861
Luongo TS , Lambert JP , Yuan A , Zhang X , Gross P , Song J , Shanmughapriya S , Gao E , Jain M , Houser SR , Koch WJ , Cheung JY , Madesh M , Elrod JW , 2015. The Mitochondrial Calcium Uniporter Matches Energetic Supply with Cardiac Workload during Stress and Modulates Permeability Transition. Cell Rep 12 , 23–34.26119731
Mackenzie IR , Feldman HH , 2005. Ubiquitin immunohistochemistry suggests classic motor neuron disease, motor neuron disease with dementia, and frontotemporal dementia of the motor neuron disease type represent a clinicopathologic spectrum. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 64 , 730–739.16106222
Mahul-Mellier AL , Burtscher J , Maharjan N , Weerens L , Croisier M , Kuttler F , Leleu M , Knott GW , Lashuel HA , 2020. The process of Lewy body formation, rather than simply alpha-synuclein fibrillization, is one of the major drivers of neurodegeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 , 4971–4982.32075919
Manczak M , Anekonda TS , Henson E , Park BS , Quinn J , Reddy PH , 2006. Mitochondria are a direct site of A beta accumulation in Alzheimer’s disease neurons: implications for free radical generation and oxidative damage in disease progression. Hum Mol Genet 15 , 1437–1449.16551656
Martin DD , Ladha S , Ehrnhoefer DE , Hayden MR , 2015. Autophagy in Huntington disease and huntingtin in autophagy. Trends Neurosci 38 , 26–35.25282404
Martinez-Vicente M , Talloczy Z , Wong E , Tang G , Koga H , Kaushik S , de Vries R , Arias E , Harris S , Sulzer D , Cuervo AM , 2010. Cargo recognition failure is responsible for inefficient autophagy in Huntington’s disease. Nat Neurosci 13 , 567–576.20383138
Masrori P , Van Damme P , 2020. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a clinical review. Eur J Neurol 27 , 1918–1929.32526057
Mastrogiacoma F , Lindsay JG , Bettendorff L , Rice J , Kish SJ , 1996. Brain protein and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex activity in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Neurol 39 , 592–598.8619544
Masuzawa A , Black KM , Pacak CA , Ericsson M , Barnett RJ , Drumm C , Seth P , Bloch DB , Levitsky S , Cowan DB , McCully JD , 2013. Transplantation of autologously derived mitochondria protects the heart from ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 304 , H966–982.23355340
McColgan P , Tabrizi SJ , 2018. Huntington’s disease: a clinical review. Eur J Neurol 25 , 24–34.28817209
McCully JD , Cowan DB , Pacak CA , Toumpoulis IK , Dayalan H , Levitsky S , 2009. Injection of isolated mitochondria during early reperfusion for cardioprotection. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 296 , H94–H105.18978192
McGarry A , McDermott M , Kieburtz K , de Blieck EA , Beal F , Marder K , Ross C , Shoulson I , Gilbert P , Mallonee WM , Guttman M , Wojcieszek J , Kumar R , LeDoux MS , Jenkins M , Rosas HD , Nance M , Biglan K , Como P , Dubinsky RM , Shannon KM , O’Suilleabhain P , Chou K , Walker F , Martin W , Wheelock VL , McCusker E , Jankovic J , Singer C , Sanchez-Ramos J , Scott B , Suchowersky O , Factor SA , Higgins DS Jr. , Molho E , Revilla F , Caviness JN , Friedman JH , Perlmutter JS , Feigin A , Anderson K , Rodriguez R , McFarland NR , Margolis RL , Farbman ES , Raymond LA , Suski V , Kostyk S , Colcher A , Seeberger L , Epping E , Esmail S , Diaz N , Fung WL , Diamond A , Frank S , Hanna P , Hermanowicz N , Dure LS , Cudkowicz M , Huntington Study Group, C.I., Coordinators, 2017. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of coenzyme Q10 in Huntington disease. Neurology 88 , 152–159.27913695
Meng H , Yamashita C , Shiba-Fukushima K , Inoshita T , Funayama M , Sato S , Hatta T , Natsume T , Umitsu M , Takagi J , Imai Y , Hattori N , 2017. Loss of Parkinson’s disease-associated protein CHCHD2 affects mitochondrial crista structure and destabilizes cytochrome c. Nat Commun 8 , 15500.28589937
Miller ER 3rd , Pastor-Barriuso R , Dalal D , Riemersma RA , Appel LJ , Guallar E , 2005. Meta-analysis: high-dosage vitamin E supplementation may increase all-cause mortality. Ann Intern Med 142 , 37–46.15537682
Misaka T , Miyashita T , Kubo Y , 2002. Primary structure of a dynamin-related mouse mitochondrial GTPase and its distribution in brain, subcellular localization, and effect on mitochondrial morphology. J Biol Chem 277 , 15834–15842.11847212
Mitsumoto H , Brooks BR , Silani V , 2014. Clinical trials in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: why so many negative trials and how can trials be improved? Lancet Neurol 13 , 1127–1138.25316019
Mungarro-Menchaca X , Ferrera P , Moran J , Arias C , 2002. beta-Amyloid peptide induces ultrastructural changes in synaptosomes and potentiates mitochondrial dysfunction in the presence of ryanodine. J Neurosci Res 68 , 89–96.11933053
Murley A , Nunnari J , 2016. The Emerging Network of Mitochondria-Organelle Contacts. Mol Cell 61 , 648–653.26942669
Murphy MP , 2009. How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species. Biochem J 417 , 1–13.19061483
Mustaly-Kalimi S , Littlefield AM , Stutzmann GE , 2018. Calcium Signaling Deficits in Glia and Autophagic Pathways Contributing to Neurodegenerative Disease. Antioxid Redox Signal 29 , 1158–1175.29634342
Mutisya EM , Bowling AC , Beal MF , 1994. Cortical cytochrome oxidase activity is reduced in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurochem 63 , 2179–2184.7964738
Napoli E , Wong S , Hung C , Ross-Inta C , Bomdica P , Giulivi C , 2013. Defective mitochondrial disulfide relay system, altered mitochondrial morphology and function in Huntington’s disease. Hum Mol Genet 22 , 989–1004.23197653
Neary D , Snowden JS , Gustafson L , Passant U , Stuss D , Black S , Freedman M , Kertesz A , Robert PH , Albert M , Boone K , Miller BL , Cummings J , Benson DF , 1998. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a consensus on clinical diagnostic criteria. Neurology 51 , 1546–1554.9855500
Nelson PT , Alafuzoff I , Bigio EH , Bouras C , Braak H , Cairns NJ , Castellani RJ , Crain BJ , Davies P , Del Tredici K , Duyckaerts C , Frosch MP , Haroutunian V , Hof PR , Hulette CM , Hyman BT , Iwatsubo T , Jellinger KA , Jicha GA , Kovari E , Kukull WA , Leverenz JB , Love S , Mackenzie IR , Mann DM , Masliah E , McKee AC , Montine TJ , Morris JC , Schneider JA , Sonnen JA , Thal DR , Trojanowski JQ , Troncoso JC , Wisniewski T , Woltjer RL , Beach TG , 2012. Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive status: a review of the literature. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 71 , 362–381.22487856
Nunomura A , Perry G , Aliev G , Hirai K , Takeda A , Balraj EK , Jones PK , Ghanbari H , Wataya T , Shimohama S , Chiba S , Atwood CS , Petersen RB , Smith MA , 2001. Oxidative damage is the earliest event in Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 60 , 759–767.11487050
Nunomura A , Perry G , Pappolla MA , Wade R , Hirai K , Chiba S , Smith MA , 1999. RNA oxidation is a prominent feature of vulnerable neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 19 , 1959–1964.10066249
Okuyama T , Kitamura T , Roy DS , Itohara S , Tonegawa S , 2016. Ventral CA1 neurons store social memory. Science 353 , 1536–1541.27708103
Opii WO , Joshi G , Head E , Milgram NW , Muggenburg BA , Klein JB , Pierce WM , Cotman CW , Butterfield DA , 2008. Proteomic identification of brain proteins in the canine model of human aging following a long-term treatment with antioxidants and a program of behavioral enrichment: relevance to Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 29 , 51–70.17055614
Orr AL , Vargas L , Turk CN , Baaten JE , Matzen JT , Dardov VJ , Attle SJ , Li J , Quackenbush DC , Goncalves RL , Perevoshchikova IV , Petrassi HM , Meeusen SL , Ainscow EK , Brand MD , 2015. Suppressors of superoxide production from mitochondrial complex III. Nat Chem Biol 11 , 834–836.26368590
Paillusson S , Gomez-Suaga P , Stoica R , Little D , Gissen P , Devine MJ , Noble W , Hanger DP , Miller CCJ , 2017. alpha-Synuclein binds to the ER-mitochondria tethering protein VAPB to disrupt Ca(2+) homeostasis and mitochondrial ATP production. Acta Neuropathol 134 , 129–149.28337542
Pandey M , Rajamma U , 2018. Huntington’s disease: the coming of age. J Genet 97 , 649–664.30027901
Pardi MB , Vogenstahl J , Dalmay T , Spano T , Pu DL , Naumann LB , Kretschmer F , Sprekeler H , Letzkus JJ , 2020. A thalamocortical top-down circuit for associative memory. Science 370 , 844–848.33184213
Park JS , Davis RL , Sue CM , 2018. Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Parkinson’s Disease: New Mechanistic Insights and Therapeutic Perspectives. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 18 , 21.29616350
Parkinson Study Group QEI , Beal MF , Oakes D , Shoulson I , Henchcliffe C , Galpern WR , Haas R , Juncos JL , Nutt JG , Voss TS , Ravina B , Shults CM , Helles K , Snively V , Lew MF , Griebner B , Watts A , Gao S , Pourcher E , Bond L , Kompoliti K , Agarwal P , Sia C , Jog M , Cole L , Sultana M , Kurlan R , Richard I , Deeley C , Waters CH , Figueroa A , Arkun A , Brodsky M , Ondo WG , Hunter CB , Jimenez-Shahed J , Palao A , Miyasaki JM , So J , Tetrud J , Reys L , Smith K , Singer C , Blenke A , Russell DS , Cotto C , Friedman JH , Lannon M , Zhang L , Drasby E , Kumar R , Subramanian T , Ford DS , Grimes DA , Cote D , Conway J , Siderowf AD , Evatt ML , Sommerfeld B , Lieberman AN , Okun MS , Rodriguez RL , Merritt S , Swartz CL , Martin WR , King P , Stover N , Guthrie S , Watts RL , Ahmed A , Fernandez HH , Winters A , Mari Z , Dawson TM , Dunlop B , Feigin AS , Shannon B , Nirenberg MJ , Ogg M , Ellias SA , Thomas CA , Frei K , Bodis-Wollner I , Glazman S , Mayer T , Hauser RA , Pahwa R , Langhammer A , Ranawaya R , Derwent L , Sethi KD , Farrow B , Prakash R , Litvan I , Robinson A , Sahay A , Gartner M , Hinson VK , Markind S , Pelikan M , Perlmutter JS , Hartlein J , Molho E , Evans S , Adler CH , Duffy A , Lind M , Elmer L , Davis K , Spears J , Wilson S , Leehey MA , Hermanowicz N , Niswonger S , Shill HA , Obradov S , Rajput A , Cowper M , Lessig S , Song D , Fontaine D , Zadikoff C , Williams K , Blindauer KA , Bergholte J , Propsom CS , Stacy MA , Field J , Mihaila D , Chilton M , Uc EY , Sieren J , Simon DK , Kraics L , Silver A , Boyd JT , Hamill RW , Ingvoldstad C , Young J , Thomas K , Kostyk SK , Wojcieszek J , Pfeiffer RF , Panisset M , Beland M , Reich SG , Cines M , Zappala N , Rivest J , Zweig R , Lumina LP , Hilliard CL , Grill S , Kellermann M , Tuite P , Rolandelli S , Kang UJ , Young J , Rao J , Cook MM , Severt L , Boyar K , 2014. A randomized clinical trial of high-dosage coenzyme Q10 in early Parkinson disease: no evidence of benefit. JAMA Neurol 71 , 543–552.24664227
Perez Ortiz JM , Swerdlow RH , 2019. Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease: Role in pathogenesis and novel therapeutic opportunities. Br J Pharmacol 176 , 3489–3507.30675901
Peruzzotti-Jametti L , Bernstock JD , Willis CM , Manferrari G , Rogall R , Fernandez-Vizarra E , Williamson JC , Braga A , van den Bosch A , Leonardi T , Krzak G , Kittel A , Beninca C , Vicario N , Tan S , Bastos C , Bicci I , Iraci N , Smith JA , Peacock B , Muller KH , Lehner PJ , Buzas EI , Faria N , Zeviani M , Frezza C , Brisson A , Matheson NJ , Viscomi C , Pluchino S , 2021. Neural stem cells traffic functional mitochondria via extracellular vesicles. PLoS Biol 19 , e3001166.33826607
Peyser CE , Folstein M , Chase GA , Starkstein S , Brandt J , Cockrell JR , Bylsma F , Coyle JT , McHugh PR , Folstein SE , 1995. Trial of d-alpha-tocopherol in Huntington’s disease. Am J Psychiatry 152 , 1771–1775.8526244
Pickrell AM , Youle RJ , 2015. The roles of PINK1, parkin, and mitochondrial fidelity in Parkinson’s disease. Neuron 85 , 257–273.25611507
Pistollato F , Sumalla Cano S , Elio I , Masias Vergara M , Giampieri F , Battino M , 2016. Role of gut microbiota and nutrients in amyloid formation and pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Nutr Rev 74 , 624–634.27634977
Potluri P , Davila A , Ruiz-Pesini E , Mishmar D , O’Hearn S , Hancock S , Simon M , Scheffler IE , Wallace DC , Procaccio V , 2009. A novel NDUFA1 mutation leads to a progressive mitochondrial complex I-specific neurodegenerative disease. Mol Genet Metab 96 , 189–195.19185523
Puri BK , Leavitt BR , Hayden MR , Ross CA , Rosenblatt A , Greenamyre JT , Hersch S , Vaddadi KS , Sword A , Horrobin DF , Manku M , Murck H , 2005. Ethyl-EPA in Huntington disease: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Neurology 65 , 286–292.16043801
Qin W , Haroutunian V , Katsel P , Cardozo CP , Ho L , Buxbaum JD , Pasinetti GM , 2009. PGC-1alpha expression decreases in the Alzheimer disease brain as a function of dementia. Arch Neurol 66 , 352–361.19273754
Ra D , Sa B , Sl B , Js M , Sj M , Da D , Ew S , O K , Eb B , Ad C , Vx T , Gg G , Pa C , Dc M , Wg B , 2021. Is Exposure to BMAA a Risk Factor for Neurodegenerative Diseases? A Response to a Critical Review of the BMAA Hypothesis. Neurotox Res 39 , 81–106.33547590
Ramsay RR , Salach JI , Dadgar J , Singer TP , 1986. Inhibition of mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase by pyridine derivatives and its possible relation to experimental and idiopathic parkinsonism. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 135 , 269–275.3485428
Ranen NG , Peyser CE , Coyle JT , Bylsma FW , Sherr M , Day L , Folstein MF , Brandt J , Ross CA , Folstein SE , 1996. A controlled trial of idebenone in Huntington’s disease. Mov Disord 11 , 549–554.8866496
Rangaraju V , Lewis TL Jr. , Hirabayashi Y , Bergami M , Motori E , Cartoni R , Kwon SK , Courchet J , 2019. Pleiotropic Mitochondria: The Influence of Mitochondria on Neuronal Development and Disease. J Neurosci 39 , 8200–8208.31619488
Rappold PM , Cui M , Grima JC , Fan RZ , de Mesy-Bentley KL , Chen L , Zhuang X , Bowers WJ , Tieu K , 2014. Drp1 inhibition attenuates neurotoxicity and dopamine release deficits in vivo. Nat Commun 5 , 5244.25370169
Rayaprolu S , Higginbotham L , Bagchi P , Watson CM , Zhang T , Levey AI , Rangaraju S , Seyfried NT , 2021. Systems-based proteomics to resolve the biology of Alzheimer’s disease beyond amyloid and tau. Neuropsychopharmacology 46 , 98–115.32898852
Rayman MP , Winther KH , Pastor-Barriuso R , Cold F , Thvilum M , Stranges S , Guallar E , Cold S , 2018. Effect of long-term selenium supplementation on mortality: Results from a multiple-dose, randomised controlled trial. Free Radic Biol Med 127 , 46–54.29454039
Reid Thompson W , Hornby B , Manuel R , Bradley E , Laux J , Carr J , Vernon HJ , 2021. A phase 2/3 randomized clinical trial followed by an open-label extension to evaluate the effectiveness of elamipretide in Barth syndrome, a genetic disorder of mitochondrial cardiolipin metabolism. Genet Med 23 , 471–478.33077895
Reiner A , Dragatsis I , Zeitlin S , Goldowitz D , 2003. Wild-type huntingtin plays a role in brain development and neuronal survival. Mol Neurobiol 28 , 259–276.14709789
Renton AE , Majounie E , Waite A , Simon-Sanchez J , Rollinson S , Gibbs JR , Schymick JC , Laaksovirta H , van Swieten JC , Myllykangas L , Kalimo H , Paetau A , Abramzon Y , Remes AM , Kaganovich A , Scholz SW , Duckworth J , Ding J , Harmer DW , Hernandez DG , Johnson JO , Mok K , Ryten M , Trabzuni D , Guerreiro RJ , Orrell RW , Neal J , Murray A , Pearson J , Jansen IE , Sondervan D , Seelaar H , Blake D , Young K , Halliwell N , Callister JB , Toulson G , Richardson A , Gerhard A , Snowden J , Mann D , Neary D , Nalls MA , Peuralinna T , Jansson L , Isoviita VM , Kaivorinne AL , Holtta-Vuori M , Ikonen E , Sulkava R , Benatar M , Wuu J , Chio A , Restagno G , Borghero G , Sabatelli M , Consortium I., Heckerman D , Rogaeva E , Zinman L , Rothstein JD , Sendtner M , Drepper C , Eichler EE , Alkan C , Abdullaev Z , Pack SD , Dutra A , Pak E , Hardy J , Singleton A , Williams NM , Heutink P , Pickering-Brown S , Morris HR , Tienari PJ , Traynor BJ , 2011. A hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked ALS-FTD. Neuron 72 , 257–268.21944779
Richardson JR , Caudle WM , Guillot TS , Watson JL , Nakamaru-Ogiso E , Seo BB , Sherer TB , Greenamyre JT , Yagi T , Matsuno-Yagi A , Miller GW , 2007. Obligatory role for complex I inhibition in the dopaminergic neurotoxicity of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). Toxicol Sci 95 , 196–204.17038483
Rohrer JD , Guerreiro R , Vandrovcova J , Uphill J , Reiman D , Beck J , Isaacs AM , Authier A , Ferrari R , Fox NC , Mackenzie IR , Warren JD , de Silva R , Holton J , Revesz T , Hardy J , Mead S , Rossor MN , 2009. The heritability and genetics of frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Neurology 73 , 1451–1456.19884572
Rosen DR , Siddique T , Patterson D , Figlewicz DA , Sapp P , Hentati A , Donaldson D , Goto J , O’Regan JP , Deng HX , , 1993. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 362 , 59–62.8446170
Ruiz A , Alberdi E , Matute C , 2018. Mitochondrial Division Inhibitor 1 (mdivi-1) Protects Neurons against Excitotoxicity through the Modulation of Mitochondrial Function and Intracellular Ca(2+) Signaling. Front Mol Neurosci 11 , 3.29386996
Santel A , Fuller MT , 2001. Control of mitochondrial morphology by a human mitofusin. J Cell Sci 114 , 867–874.11181170
Sanz A , Soikkeli M , Portero-Otin M , Wilson A , Kemppainen E , McIlroy G , Ellila S , Kemppainen KK , Tuomela T , Lakanmaa M , Kiviranta E , Stefanatos R , Dufour E , Hutz B , Naudi A , Jove M , Zeb A , Vartiainen S , Matsuno-Yagi A , Yagi T , Rustin P , Pamplona R , Jacobs HT , 2010. Expression of the yeast NADH dehydrogenase Ndi1 in Drosophila confers increased lifespan independently of dietary restriction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107 , 9105–9110.20435911
Saudou F , Humbert S , 2016. The Biology of Huntingtin. Neuron 89 , 910–926.26938440
Sawda C , Moussa C , Turner RS , 2017. Resveratrol for Alzheimer’s disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1403 , 142–149.28815614
Schapira AH , Cooper JM , Dexter D , Jenner P , Clark JB , Marsden CD , 1989. Mitochondrial complex I deficiency in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 1 , 1269.2566813
Schapira AH , Mann VM , Cooper JM , Dexter D , Daniel SE , Jenner P , Clark JB , Marsden CD , 1990. Anatomic and disease specificity of NADH CoQ1 reductase (complex I) deficiency in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurochem 55 , 2142–2145.2121905
Schonfeld P , Reiser G , 2013. Why does brain metabolism not favor burning of fatty acids to provide energy? Reflections on disadvantages of the use of free fatty acids as fuel for brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33 , 1493–1499.23921897
Schulte J , Littleton JT , 2011. The biological function of the Huntingtin protein and its relevance to Huntington’s Disease pathology. Curr Trends Neurol 5 , 65–78.22180703
Scialo F , Sriram A , Fernandez-Ayala D , Gubina N , Lohmus M , Nelson G , Logan A , Cooper HM , Navas P , Enriquez JA , Murphy MP , Sanz A , 2016. Mitochondrial ROS Produced via Reverse Electron Transport Extend Animal Lifespan. Cell Metab 23 , 725–734.27076081
Shefner JM , Cudkowicz ME , Schoenfeld D , Conrad T , Taft J , Chilton M , Urbinelli L , Qureshi M , Zhang H , Pestronk A , Caress J , Donofrio P , Sorenson E , Bradley W , Lomen-Hoerth C , Pioro E , Rezania K , Ross M , Pascuzzi R , Heiman-Patterson T , Tandan R , Mitsumoto H , Rothstein J , Smith-Palmer T , MacDonald D , Burke D , Consortium N., 2004. A clinical trial of creatine in ALS. Neurology 63 , 1656–1661.15534251
Sherer TB , Betarbet R , Testa CM , Seo BB , Richardson JR , Kim JH , Miller GW , Yagi T , Matsuno-Yagi A , Greenamyre JT , 2003. Mechanism of toxicity in rotenone models of Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci 23 , 10756–10764.14645467
Sheu KF , Kim YT , Blass JP , Weksler ME , 1985. An immunochemical study of the pyruvate dehydrogenase deficit in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Ann Neurol 17 , 444–449.4004169
Shi X , Zhao M , Fu C , Fu A , 2017. Intravenous administration of mitochondria for treating experimental Parkinson’s disease. Mitochondrion 34 , 91–100.28242362
Shinn LJ , Lagalwar S , 2021. Treating Neurodegenerative Disease with Antioxidants: Efficacy of the Bioactive Phenol Resveratrol and Mitochondrial-Targeted MitoQ and SkQ. Antioxidants (Basel) 10 .
Shteinfer-Kuzmine A , Argueti S , Gupta R , Shvil N , Abu-Hamad S , Gropper Y , Hoeber J , Magri A , Messina A , Kozlova EN , Shoshan-Barmatz V , Israelson A , 2019. A VDAC1-Derived N-Terminal Peptide Inhibits Mutant SOD1-VDAC1 Interactions and Toxicity in the SOD1 Model of ALS. Front Cell Neurosci 13 , 346.31474832
Siddiqui A , Rivera-Sanchez S , Castro Mdel R , Acevedo-Torres K , Rane A , Torres-Ramos CA , Nicholls DG , Andersen JK , Ayala-Torres S , 2012. Mitochondrial DNA damage is associated with reduced mitochondrial bioenergetics in Huntington’s disease. Free Radic Biol Med 53 , 1478–1488.22709585
Silva CA , Yalnizyan-Carson A , Fernandez Busch MV , van Zwieten M , Verhage M , Lohmann C , 2021. Activity-dependent regulation of mitochondrial motility in developing cortical dendrites. Elife 10 .
Silva DF , Candeias E , Esteves AR , Magalhaes JD , Ferreira IL , Nunes-Costa D , Rego AC , Empadinhas N , Cardoso SM , 2020. Microbial BMAA elicits mitochondrial dysfunction, innate immunity activation, and Alzheimer’s disease features in cortical neurons. J Neuroinflammation 17 , 332.33153477
Silverman DH , Small GW , Chang CY , Lu CS , Kung De Aburto MA , Chen W , Czernin J , Rapoport SI , Pietrini P , Alexander GE , Schapiro MB , Jagust WJ , Hoffman JM , Welsh-Bohmer KA , Alavi A , Clark CM , Salmon E , de Leon MJ , Mielke R , Cummings JL , Kowell AP , Gambhir SS , Hoh CK , Phelps ME , 2001. Positron emission tomography in evaluation of dementia: Regional brain metabolism and long-term outcome. JAMA 286 , 2120–2127.11694153
Simmons EC , Scholpa NE , Schnellmann RG , 2020. Mitochondrial biogenesis as a therapeutic target for traumatic and neurodegenerative CNS diseases. Exp Neurol 329 , 113309.32289315
Simuni T , Fiske B , Merchant K , Coffey CS , Klingner E , Caspell-Garcia C , Lafontant DE , Matthews H , Wyse RK , Brundin P , Simon DK , Schwarzschild M , Weiner D , Adams J , Venuto C , Dawson TM , Baker L , Kostrzebski M , Ward T , Rafaloff G , Parkinson Study Group, N.-P.D.I., Collaborators, 2021. Efficacy of Nilotinib in Patients With Moderately Advanced Parkinson Disease: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol 78 , 312–320.33315105
Smith RA , Porteous CM , Coulter CV , Murphy MP , 1999. Selective targeting of an antioxidant to mitochondria. Eur J Biochem 263 , 709–716.10469134
Snow BJ , Rolfe FL , Lockhart MM , Frampton CM , O’Sullivan JD , Fung V , Smith RA , Murphy MP , Taylor KM , Protect Study G , 2010. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study to assess the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoQ as a disease-modifying therapy in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 25 , 1670–1674.20568096
Soltys DT , Pereira CPM , Rowies FT , Farfel JM , Grinberg LT , Suemoto CK , Leite REP , Rodriguez RD , Ericson NG , Bielas JH , Souza-Pinto NC , 2019. Lower mitochondrial DNA content but not increased mutagenesis associates with decreased base excision repair activity in brains of AD subjects. Neurobiol Aging 73 , 161–170.30359878
Song W , Chen J , Petrilli A , Liot G , Klinglmayr E , Zhou Y , Poquiz P , Tjong J , Pouladi MA , Hayden MR , Masliah E , Ellisman M , Rouiller I , Schwarzenbacher R , Bossy B , Perkins G , Bossy-Wetzel E , 2011. Mutant huntingtin binds the mitochondrial fission GTPase dynamin-related protein-1 and increases its enzymatic activity. Nat Med 17 , 377–382.21336284
Sorbi S , Bird ED , Blass JP , 1983. Decreased pyruvate dehydrogenase complex activity in Huntington and Alzheimer brain. Ann Neurol 13 , 72–78.6219611
Soto C , 2003. Unfolding the role of protein misfolding in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Neurosci 4 , 49–60.12511861
Squitieri F , Falleni A , Cannella M , Orobello S , Fulceri F , Lenzi P , Fornai F , 2010. Abnormal morphology of peripheral cell tissues from patients with Huntington disease. J Neural Transm (Vienna) 117 , 77–83.19834779
Starkov AA , 2008. The role of mitochondria in reactive oxygen species metabolism and signaling. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1147 , 37–52.19076429
Stauch KL , Purnell PR , Fox HS , 2014. Quantitative proteomics of synaptic and nonsynaptic mitochondria: insights for synaptic mitochondrial vulnerability. J Proteome Res 13 , 2620–2636.24708184
Steinhubl SR , 2008. Why have antioxidants failed in clinical trials? Am J Cardiol 101 , 14D–19D.
Stephens OR , Grant D , Frimel M , Wanner N , Yin M , Willard B , Erzurum SC , Asosingh K , 2020. Characterization and origins of cell-free mitochondria in healthy murine and human blood. Mitochondrion 54 , 102–112.32781153
Stier A , 2021. Human blood contains circulating cell-free mitochondria, but are they really functional? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 320 , E859–E863.33719587
Straub IR , Weraarpachai W , Shoubridge EA , 2021. Multi-OMICS study of a CHCHD10 variant causing ALS demonstrates metabolic rewiring and activation of endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondrial unfolded protein responses. Hum Mol Genet 30 , 687–705.33749723
Strong MJ , Abrahams S , Goldstein LH , Woolley S , McLaughlin P , Snowden J , Mioshi E , Roberts-South A , Benatar M , HortobaGyi T , Rosenfeld J , Silani V , Ince PG , Turner MR , 2017. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis - frontotemporal spectrum disorder (ALS-FTSD): Revised diagnostic criteria. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener 18 , 153–174.28054827
Sultana R , Perluigi M , Newman SF , Pierce WM , Cini C , Coccia R , Butterfield DA , 2010. Redox proteomic analysis of carbonylated brain proteins in mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease. Antioxid Redox Signal 12 , 327–336.19686046
Swerdlow RH , 2018. Mitochondria and Mitochondrial Cascades in Alzheimer’s Disease. J Alzheimers Dis 62 , 1403–1416.29036828
Swerdlow RH , Burns JM , Khan SM , 2010. The Alzheimer’s disease mitochondrial cascade hypothesis. J Alzheimers Dis 20 Suppl 2 , S265–279.20442494
Swerdlow RH , Burns JM , Khan SM , 2014. The Alzheimer’s disease mitochondrial cascade hypothesis: progress and perspectives. Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 , 1219–1231.24071439
Swerdlow RH , Khan SM , 2004. A “mitochondrial cascade hypothesis” for sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Med Hypotheses 63 , 8–20.15193340
Synofzik M , Ronchi D , Keskin I , Basak AN , Wilhelm C , Gobbi C , Birve A , Biskup S , Zecca C , Fernandez-Santiago R , Kaugesaar T , Schols L , Marklund SL , Andersen PM , 2012. Mutant superoxide dismutase-1 indistinguishable from wild-type causes ALS. Hum Mol Genet 21 , 3568–3574.22595972
Tafuri F , Ronchi D , Magri F , Comi GP , Corti S , 2015. SOD1 misplacing and mitochondrial dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathogenesis. Front Cell Neurosci 9 , 336.26379505
Tan W , Naniche N , Bogush A , Pedrini S , Trotti D , Pasinelli P , 2013. Small peptides against the mutant SOD1/Bcl-2 toxic mitochondrial complex restore mitochondrial function and cell viability in mutant SOD1-mediated ALS. J Neurosci 33 , 11588–11598.23843527
Tan W , Pasinelli P , Trotti D , 2014. Role of mitochondria in mutant SOD1 linked amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Biochim Biophys Acta 1842 , 1295–1301.24568860
Tanner CM , Kamel F , Ross GW , Hoppin JA , Goldman SM , Korell M , Marras C , Bhudhikanok GS , Kasten M , Chade AR , Comyns K , Richards MB , Meng C , Priestley B , Fernandez HH , Cambi F , Umbach DM , Blair A , Sandler DP , Langston JW , 2011. Rotenone, paraquat, and Parkinson’s disease. Environ Health Perspect 119 , 866–872.21269927
Tayler H , Fraser T , Miners JS , Kehoe PG , Love S , 2010. Oxidative balance in Alzheimer’s disease: relationship to APOE, Braak tangle stage, and the concentrations of soluble and insoluble amyloid-beta. J Alzheimers Dis 22 , 1363–1373.20930272
Terni B , Boada J , Portero-Otin M , Pamplona R , Ferrer I , 2010. Mitochondrial ATP-synthase in the entorhinal cortex is a target of oxidative stress at stages I/II of Alzheimer’s disease pathology. Brain Pathol 20 , 222–233.19298596
Tolosa E , Vila M , Klein C , Rascol O , 2020. LRRK2 in Parkinson disease: challenges of clinical trials. Nat Rev Neurol 16 , 97–107.31980808
Trimmer PA , Swerdlow RH , Parks JK , Keeney P , Bennett JP Jr. , Miller SW , Davis RE , Parker WD Jr. , 2000. Abnormal mitochondrial morphology in sporadic Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease cybrid cell lines. Exp Neurol 162 , 37–50.10716887
Trist BG , Hare DJ , Double KL , 2019. Oxidative stress in the aging substantia nigra and the etiology of Parkinson’s disease. Aging Cell 18 , e13031.31432604
Trnka J , Blaikie FH , Smith RA , Murphy MP , 2008. A mitochondria-targeted nitroxide is reduced to its hydroxylamine by ubiquinol in mitochondria. Free Radic Biol Med 44 , 1406–1419.18206669
Turner RS , Thomas RG , Craft S , van Dyck CH , Mintzer J , Reynolds BA , Brewer JB , Rissman RA , Raman R , Aisen PS , Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative S , 2015. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of resveratrol for Alzheimer disease. Neurology 85 , 1383–1391.26362286
Uddin MS , Kabir MT , Rahman MS , Behl T , Jeandet P , Ashraf GM , Najda A , Bin-Jumah MN , El-Seedi HR , Abdel-Daim MM , 2020. Revisiting the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis: From Anti-Abeta Therapeutics to Auspicious New Ways for Alzheimer’s Disease. Int J Mol Sci 21 .
Uhrbrand A , Stenager E , Pedersen MS , Dalgas U , 2015. Parkinson’s disease and intensive exercise therapy--a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Neurol Sci 353 , 9–19.25936252
Vaddadi KS , Soosai E , Chiu E , Dingjan P , 2002. A randomised, placebo-controlled, double blind study of treatment of Huntington’s disease with unsaturated fatty acids. Neuroreport 13 , 29–33.11924889
Valle I , Alvarez-Barrientos A , Arza E , Lamas S , Monsalve M , 2005. PGC-1alpha regulates the mitochondrial antioxidant defense system in vascular endothelial cells. Cardiovasc Res 66 , 562–573.15914121
van Bergeijk P , Adrian M , Hoogenraad CC , Kapitein LC , 2015. Optogenetic control of organelle transport and positioning. Nature 518 , 111–114.25561173
Van Laar VS , Berman SB , 2009. Mitochondrial dynamics in Parkinson’s disease. Exp Neurol 218 , 247–256.19332061
Vance JE , 2014. MAM (mitochondria-associated membranes) in mammalian cells: lipids and beyond. Biochim Biophys Acta 1841 , 595–609.24316057
Vercellino I , Sazanov LA , 2021. The assembly, regulation and function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
Vetere G , Tran LM , Moberg S , Steadman PE , Restivo L , Morrison FG , Ressler KJ , Josselyn SA , Frankland PW , 2019. Memory formation in the absence of experience. Nat Neurosci 22 , 933–940.31036944
Vis JC , Verbeek MM , De Waal RM , Ten Donkelaar HJ , Kremer HP , 1999. 3-Nitropropionic acid induces a spectrum of Huntington’s disease-like neuropathology in rat striatum. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 25 , 513–521.10632901
Volgyi K , Gulyassy P , Haden K , Kis V , Badics K , Kekesi KA , Simor A , Gyorffy B , Toth EA , Lubec G , Juhasz G , Dobolyi A , 2015. Synaptic mitochondria: a brain mitochondria cluster with a specific proteome. J Proteomics 120 , 142–157.25782751
Vonsattel JP , DiFiglia M , 1998. Huntington disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57 , 369–384.9596408
Walter J , Bolognin S , Antony PMA , Nickels SL , Poovathingal SK , Salamanca L , Magni S , Perfeito R , Hoel F , Qing X , Jarazo J , Arias-Fuenzalida J , Ignac T , Monzel AS , Gonzalez-Cano L , Pereira de Almeida L , Skupin A , Tronstad KJ , Schwamborn JC , 2019. Neural Stem Cells of Parkinson’s Disease Patients Exhibit Aberrant Mitochondrial Morphology and Functionality. Stem Cell Reports 12 , 878–889.30982740
Wang J , Guo X , Lu W , Liu J , Zhang H , Quan Q , Su H , Ma L , Gao F , Qu Q , 2021. Donepezil Combined with DL-3-n-Butylphthalide Delays Cognitive Decline in Patients with Mild to Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease: A Multicenter, Prospective Cohort Study. J Alzheimers Dis 80 , 673–681.33579850
Wang J , Wang P , Li S , Wang S , Li Y , Liang N , Wang M , 2014. Mdivi-1 prevents apoptosis induced by ischemia-reperfusion injury in primary hippocampal cells via inhibition of reactive oxygen species-activated mitochondrial pathway. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 23 , 1491–1499.24774441
Wang W , Zhao F , Ma X , Perry G , Zhu X , 2020. Mitochondria dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: recent advances. Mol Neurodegener 15 , 30.32471464
Wang X , Gerdes HH , 2015. Transfer of mitochondria via tunneling nanotubes rescues apoptotic PC12 cells. Cell Death Differ 22 , 1181–1191.25571977
Wang X , Su B , Lee HG , Li X , Perry G , Smith MA , Zhu X , 2009. Impaired balance of mitochondrial fission and fusion in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neurosci 29 , 9090–9103.19605646
Wang X , Winter D , Ashrafi G , Schlehe J , Wong YL , Selkoe D , Rice S , Steen J , LaVoie MJ , Schwarz TL , 2011. PINK1 and Parkin target Miro for phosphorylation and degradation to arrest mitochondrial motility. Cell 147 , 893–906.22078885
Wauters F , Cornelissen T , Imberechts D , Martin S , Koentjoro B , Sue C , Vangheluwe P , Vandenberghe W , 2020. LRRK2 mutations impair depolarization-induced mitophagy through inhibition of mitochondrial accumulation of RAB10. Autophagy 16 , 203–222.30945962
Wingo AP , Dammer EB , Breen MS , Logsdon BA , Duong DM , Troncosco JC , Thambisetty M , Beach TG , Serrano GE , Reiman EM , Caselli RJ , Lah JJ , Seyfried NT , Levey AI , Wingo TS , 2019. Large-scale proteomic analysis of human brain identifies proteins associated with cognitive trajectory in advanced age. Nat Commun 10 , 1619.30962425
Writing Group for the, N.E.T.i.P.D.I., Kieburtz K , Tilley BC , Elm JJ , Babcock D , Hauser R , Ross GW , Augustine AH , Augustine EU , Aminoff MJ , Bodis-Wollner IG , Boyd J , Cambi F , Chou K , Christine CW , Cines M , Dahodwala N , Derwent L , Dewey RB Jr. , Hawthorne K , Houghton DJ , Kamp C , Leehey M , Lew MF , Liang GS , Luo ST , Mari Z , Morgan JC , Parashos S , Perez A , Petrovitch H , Rajan S , Reichwein S , Roth JT , Schneider JS , Shannon KM , Simon DK , Simuni T , Singer C , Sudarsky L , Tanner CM , Umeh CC , Williams K , Wills AM , 2015. Effect of creatine monohydrate on clinical progression in patients with Parkinson disease: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 313 , 584–593.25668262
Wu Z , Puigserver P , Andersson U , Zhang C , Adelmant G , Mootha V , Troy A , Cinti S , Lowell B , Scarpulla RC , Spiegelman BM , 1999. Mechanisms controlling mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration through the thermogenic coactivator PGC-1. Cell 98 , 115–124.10412986
Yamamuro K , Bicks LK , Leventhal MB , Kato D , Im S , Flanigan ME , Garkun Y , Norman KJ , Caro K , Sadahiro M , Kullander K , Akbarian S , Russo SJ , Morishita H , 2020. A prefrontal-paraventricular thalamus circuit requires juvenile social experience to regulate adult sociability in mice. Nat Neurosci 23 , 1240–1252.32868932
Yang D , Ying J , Wang X , Zhao T , Yoon S , Fang Y , Zheng Q , Liu X , Yu W , Hua F , 2021. Mitochondrial Dynamics: A Key Role in Neurodegeneration and a Potential Target for Neurodegenerative Disease. Front Neurosci 15 , 654785.33912006
Yang L , Zhao K , Calingasan NY , Luo G , Szeto HH , Beal MF , 2009. Mitochondria targeted peptides protect against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine neurotoxicity. Antioxid Redox Signal 11 , 2095–2104.19203217
Yiannopoulou KG , Anastasiou AI , Zachariou V , Pelidou SH , 2019. Reasons for Failed Trials of Disease-Modifying Treatments for Alzheimer Disease and Their Contribution in Recent Research. Biomedicines 7 .
Zambon F , Cherubini M , Fernandes HJR , Lang C , Ryan BJ , Volpato V , Bengoa-Vergniory N , Vingill S , Attar M , Booth HDE , Haenseler W , Vowles J , Bowden R , Webber C , Cowley SA , Wade-Martins R , 2019. Cellular alpha-synuclein pathology is associated with bioenergetic dysfunction in Parkinson’s iPSC-derived dopamine neurons. Hum Mol Genet 28 , 2001–2013.30753527
Zhang N , Wang S , Li Y , Che L , Zhao Q , 2013. A selective inhibitor of Drp1, mdivi-1, acts against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury via an anti-apoptotic pathway in rats. Neurosci Lett 535 , 104–109.23313133
Zhang Z , Ma Z , Yan C , Pu K , Wu M , Bai J , Li Y , Wang Q , 2019. Muscle-derived autologous mitochondrial transplantation: A novel strategy for treating cerebral ischemic injury. Behav Brain Res 356 , 322–331.30213662
Zhao XY , Lu MH , Yuan DJ , Xu DE , Yao PP , Ji WL , Chen H , Liu WL , Yan CX , Xia YY , Li S , Tao J , Ma QH , 2019. Mitochondrial Dysfunction in Neural Injury. Front Neurosci 13 , 30.30778282
Zhu X , Perry G , Smith MA , Wang X , 2013. Abnormal mitochondrial dynamics in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 33 Suppl 1 , S253–262.22531428
