LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


7907126
4399
Issues Ment Health Nurs
Issues Ment Health Nurs
Issues in mental health nursing
0161-2840
1096-4673

34644221
9233180
10.1080/01612840.2021.1979142
NIHMS1815615
Article
Improving Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms and Cognitive Status of Participants with Dementia Through the Use of Therapeutic Interactive Pets
LaRose Bryanna Streit DNP, APRN, AGNP-BC a
Wiese Lisa Kirk PhD, RN, PHNA-BC, CNE a
de los Ángeles Ortega Hernández María DNP, APRN, GNP-BC, PMHNP-BC, FAANP, FAAN b
a C. E. Lynn College of Nursing, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida, USA
b Louis and Anne Green Memory and Wellness Center, Alzheimer’s Disease Initiative, Christine E. Lynn College of Nursing, Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, Florida, USA
CONTACT Bryanna Streit LaRose Streit.bryanna@gmail.com C. E. Lynn College of Nursing, Florida Atlantic University, 777 Glades Road, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.
22 6 2022
4 2022
13 10 2021
01 4 2023
43 4 330343
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
In the US, one in three older adults die with Alzheimer’s disease or a related dementia. Currently, there is no cure for the rapidly growing burden, but there are pharmacological treatments to manage the symptoms, which lead to numerous side effects. We tested the effectiveness of a non-pharmacological therapeutic interactive pet (TIP) in improving mood/behavior and cognition among 12 persons with mild-moderate dementia attending an adult day center (ADC) over 12 visits. Mood/behavioral symptoms were assessed using the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Mood Scale (AD-RD), Observed Emotion Rating Scale (OERS), and the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD). Cognition was assessed via Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE). Paired-sample t-tests, Pearson’s correlation, repeated measures t-test, and a post-intervention qualitative inquiry were used to examine the significance of TIP. As a result, all mood scores improved over time, with two showing significance: OERS (M = 73.7/SD = 9.6); conditions t(11) = −19.18, p&lt;.001, and CSDD (M = 8.8/SD = 7.2); conditions t(11) = 4.12, p =.002. Over half (0.67%) scored higher on the MMSE post-test than the pretest: M = 10.7(SD = 5.5) and M = 12.2(SD = 7.1), respectively. Participants stroked and spoke often to their pets. Several family members reported participants sleeping with their pet following the program’s conclusion. TIP proved to be a safe alternative method to improving mood/behavior in persons with dementia attending an ADC. MMSE scores also improved, although confounding factors such as inter-rater reliability and a potential endorphin effect may have impacted scores. Improving Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms and Cognitive Status of Participants with Dementia through the Use of Therapeutic Interactive Pets


pmcDementia is a syndrome that affects over 50 million people worldwide, with a new case emerging every three seconds (Alzheimer’s Disease International, 2018). Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is expected to nearly triple by 2050. In the US, one in three older adults die with Alzheimer’s or a related dementia (ADRD); more than from breast cancer and prostate cancer combined (Gaugler et al., 2019). In Florida alone, the site of this study, the rate of AD is expected to increase by 33.3% from 2018 to 2025 (Florida Alzheimer’s Statistics, 2018). Currently, there is no cure for the rapidly growing burden of ADRD. There are only treatments to manage the symptoms. Those who have dementia often experience behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), which includes agitation, aggression, depression, anxiety, psychosis, and disinhibition (Kales et al., 2015). These symptoms usually lead to pharmacological treatment with antipsychotics, antidepressants, and benzodiazepines. These and other medications lead to early placement into nursing homes, excess morbidity, mortality, and hospital admissions due to the numerous side effects including hypotension, extrapyramidal symptoms, dizziness, and weight gain (Kales et al., 2015). There are evidence-based approaches of using live as well as robotic pet therapy for individuals with dementia that showed a decrease in their challenging behaviors and an increase in positive behaviors such as pleasure, alertness, and decreased anxiety, in institutionalized settings. However, the use of robotic pet therapy, particularly in Adult Day Centers (ADCs), has not been widely tested.

Introduction

The purpose of this quality improvement doctoral project was to evaluate the feasibility of a technology-enhanced method for reducing troublesome BPSD and improving cognitive status of individuals with dementia attending an ADC. The question guiding the inquiry was: In adults aged 50 and older with ADRD in an adult day center, how does the use of affordable therapeutic interactive pets (TIP) impact participants’ behavioral and psychological symptoms and cognitive status as indicated by specific observational measures over 12 visits?

Conceptual framework

The conceptual framework that was utilized for this project was Technological Competency as Caring in Nursing (Locsin, 2005) a middle range theory grounded in Nursing as Caring (Boykin &amp; Schoenhofer, 2001). Technology coexists in nursing practice to enhance care and assisting with diagnosing diseases. Technology is seen in a variety of healthcare settings such as inpatient, outpatient, or community settings. It is used to monitor one’s health and the progression of treatment using automatic thermometers, blood pressure cuffs, intravenous pumps, screenings such as mammograms, ultrasounds, and computers (Locsin &amp; Purnell, 2009). These technologies facilitate human caring and are designed to enhance human health care (Locsin, 2017). Technology guides nurses in their practice and can help bridge the gap between the nurse and one being nursed. It allows the nurse to “…enter the world of the one being nursed and know them as participants in their care rather than impersonal objects of care” (Locsin, 2017, p. 163).

Locsin (2017) describes the process of nursing as (1) Technological Knowing with understanding that person is represented from the data obtained through technology and knowing them as participants in their care rather than impersonal objects of care, (2) Mutual Designing which allows mutual care from nurse and one being nursed, (3) Participative Engaging with alternating implementation and evaluation of continuous technological knowing, and (4) Universal Technological Domain with the continuous, cyclic process of knowing person as caring through technological knowing, mutual designing, and participative engaging (p. 163).

Building on Locsin’s four nursing as caring technological processes (2017), the use of technology through robotic therapeutic interactive pets enhanced the care given to the participants by strengthening their emotional responses (Figure 1). TIP improved the personal relationship between participants and nurses by allowing them to partake in their care. Specifically, for this project, technological knowing was seen with the participant using TIP to improve their mood and cognition, enabling the investigators to see them as a person rather than the person’s disease. Mutual designing was used by allowing the investigators and participant to partake in appropriate care without emotional stress causing participants to physically act out. Participative engaging was used by the investigators entering the world of the participant and evaluating the outcomes TIP provides. Universal technological domains were used by exploring the dynamic nature of knowing in nursing and allowing the participant and investigators to know each other more as caring persons.

Literature review

Pet therapy has been proven to be a cost effective, therapeutic intervention for improving mood and behavior in the older adult population. An early live animal assisted therapy evidence-based program and its follow-up study were proven successful in a day center program (Kanamori et al., 2001a, 2001b) as well as a more recent study (Liang et al., 2017). Research was available regarding pet therapy in long-term care facilities (Moyle et al., 2017; Sicurella and Fitzsimmons, 2016), assisted living facilities (Friedmann et al., 2015), and nursing homes (Jøranson et al., 2015). These programs demonstrated patient and family perceptions of improved quality of life and self-care management by aiding in controlling symptoms of dementia. However, the use of therapeutic interactive pets in adult day centers has not been widely published.

Current treatment of ADRD in institutionalized settings

Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) of ADRD are seen in most individuals who have dementia. Apathy, depression, and anxiety are the most common symptoms (Kales et al., 2015). These symptoms impact the care given to the individuals as well as their family members. In a meta-analysis, Kales and colleagues studied systematic reviews, Cochrane reviews, and randomized controlled trials of pharmacological treatments of BPSD of individuals who have dementia (2015). They noted that the medication used to treat BPSD is off label since the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved their use in the U.S. It is unclear if the benefits outweigh the risks of the adverse effects (AE) associated with these medications. AE of antipsychotics (typical and atypical) include anticholinergic effects, postural hypotension, prolonged QT, extrapyramidal symptoms, weight gain, diabetes, and increased risk of cerebrovascular events. Kales’ team (2015) also found that several studies showed increased mortality. Tricyclic antidepressants showed limited benefit with AE similar to antipsychotics, while selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants showed a reduction in agitation. However, side effects included nausea, vomiting, headaches, tremor, gastrointestinal bleeding, and QT prolongation. In other studies reviewed, they found a positive impact with the use of cholinesterase inhibitors, but there was often an increase in Parkinsonian symptoms such as tremors. These investigators also advised against benzodiazepines for management of BPSD except in acute crisis, due to AE of sedation, dizziness, worsened cognition, respiratory depression, dependency, and falls (Kales et al., 2015).

With this adult population, the use of these medications often provides more harm than benefit. This population endures physiological changes starting at the age of 40, with a decrease in kidney function leading to less excretion of the medication, leading to a longer half-life and enhanced response from the medication (Kennedy-Malone et al., 2019). The AE of these medications are more prominent in this older adult population. The risk of syncope, sedation, dehydration, and hypotension is increased, which can lead to falls and broken hips or subdural hematomas resulting in worse outcomes. Kales et al. (2015) summarized the current evidence, suggesting that non-pharmacologic strategies demonstrate a greater effect than most drug treatments. The use of TIP is a non-pharmacologic treatment that offers a safe intervention to improve the BPSD seen in individuals with ADRD.

Long-term care facilities

A cluster-randomized controlled trial was conducted in 28 long-term care facilities (LTC) in Australia with aims to compare the effects of Paro (a robotic seal), a plush toy, and usual care has on emotional and behavioral symptoms of individuals with dementia in LTC facilities (Moyle et al., 2017). There were three groups, each receiving one of the previously mentioned interventions. The group that received Paro showed a statistically significant (p = .01) reduction in agitation, reduction in neutral effect with Paro intervention (p = .02), and improvement in pleasure (p = .01) compared to the other groups (Moyle et al., 2017, pp. 771–72).

Assisted-living facilities

A randomized clinical trial with repeated measures was designed to evaluate emotional symptoms, behavioral symptoms, and prevent deterioration of physical function of individuals with mild to moderate cognitive impairment in assisted living facilities (ALF) with the use of a pet-assisted living (PAL) intervention versus reminiscing intervention (Friedmann et al., 2015). Two groups were randomly chosen with one group using the PAL intervention of 60 to 90-minute sessions with a therapy dog, twice a week, for 12 weeks. The second group completed the reminiscing intervention, which included social and motor skills (Friedmann et al., 2015). Results for PAL group showed a statistically significant decrease in depression (p = .01) over time, and agitation decreased slightly over time (Friedmann et al., 2015, p. 284).

Nursing homes

Researchers conducted a cluster-randomized controlled study in a Norwegian nursing home (NH) with the aim of examining the effect of participating in a Paro intervention group on symptoms of depression and agitation among NH residents with moderate to severe dementia (Jøranson et al., 2015). There were two groups; a control group with 26 participants, and an intervention group with 27 participants who received Paro for 12 weeks with 30-minute group sessions twice a week. Results for the intervention group included a decrease in agitation and a statically significant decrease in depression (p = .03) from baseline to the end of the intervention (Jøranson et al., 2015).

Adult day centers

Research regarding the use of pet therapy in adult day centers (ADC) is scant, despite logistical advantages. ADCs provide professional and compassionate services to adults in a group setting including socialization, transportation, personal care, and therapeutic activities (National Adult Day Services Association, 2018). Attendance at ADCs has been shown to improve mood, decrease aggressive symptoms, and delay institutionalization (Preez et al., 2018). Introducing pet therapy in ADC settings could be a novel means of adding to the benefits of attendance.

A pilot randomized controlled trial took place in a New Zealand ADC with the objective to assess the effects that Paro had on affective, social, behavioral, and physiological symptoms for persons with dementia in ADC and a home setting (Liang et al., 2017). There were two groups with one control group receiving standard activities and the other intervention group who used Paro two to three times a week for 1.5 hours at a time for a total of 6 weeks at the ADC and at home (Liang et al., 2017). Results showed a significant improvement in positive facial expressions (happy/smiling) (p = .04) and social interactions (p = .04) (Liang et al., 2017, p. 876).

Another study (Kanamori et al., 2001a) and its follow-up article (Kanamori et al., 2001b) took place in an ADC in Japan with the purpose to assess cognitive and physical function and endocrinological stress with the use of animal-assisted therapy (AAT) in patients with cognitive delcine. There was a control group and an intervention group with participants who used AAT for six biweekly sessions (Kanamori et al., 2001a, 2001b). These authors showed a statistically significant (p &lt; .05) reduction in aggressiveness and anxieties/phobias (p &lt; .01) with the use of AAT (Kanamori et al., 2001a, 2001b). A pilot study took place in a day center over 6 months to evaluate the efficacy of using AAT in individuals with Alzheimer’s disease. Participants were divided between two intervention groups, an AAT and a reality orientation therapy group (ROT), both which use stimulation to reorient the participants, and a control group. The AAT and ROT groups met once a week for 45 minutes over a 6-month time span. Compared to a control group that did not receive either intervention, the AAT group showed a statistically significant improvement in Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) scores (p &lt; .001) (Menna et al., 2016).

Summary of literature review

In summary, this review shows an alternative therapy for moderating BPSD and cognition using pet therapy. The potential benefits of implementing pet therapy include decreased verbal aggression, increased positive interactions such as cooperative, attentive, and talkative, and increased positive emotions such as pleasure, alertness, and reduction in anxiety (Pope et al., 2016). Pet therapy has also shown to decrease negative emotions of depression and agitation (Friedmann et al., 2015). Using pet therapy has even been linked to an increase in MMSE scores (Menna et al., 2016). Florence Nightingale supported the use of animal therapy for patients who had chronic illnesses which later showed an improvement in their day-to-day living, increased social connections, lowered stress levels, and decreased severity of dementia symptoms (Sicurella &amp; Fitzsimmons, 2016).

Each of these aforementioned studies illustrated the benefit of pet therapy for improving symptoms of individuals who have ADRD. Only one study located identified the potential limitation of bias. We minimized this threat by using multiple rating scales. There was more than one observer during the interactions with the pets and tests for inter-observer reliability was conducted. We then compared results between committee members. To further preserve internal validity, we shared both quantitative and qualitative results with key family members and staff who work daily with the participants as a means of member checking.

Methods

In this doctoral project where the participants served as their own controls, three hypotheses were designed using percentage criteria based on findings reported by previous animal assisted therapy programs in which most participants experienced improvement in patient stress levels.

Hypothesis 1: 80% of participants will demonstrate a one-point increase in Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) following the TIP intervention as indicated by pre and post-test MMSE scores (Menna et al., 2016).

Hypothesis 2: 80% of participants will demonstrate an improved positive mood/behavior following the TIP intervention as indicated by a 60% increase in scores on the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Mood Scale (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008) and Observed Emotion Rating Scale (Chen et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2013).

Hypothesis 3: 80% of participants will demonstrate decreased depression risk following the TIP intervention as measured by a 60% decrease on the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (Friedmann et al., 2015).

Recruitment of participants

This Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) project was conducted at a South Florida Adult Day Center. Twelve participants were selected with guidance from the ADC staff, who have a deep understanding and knowledge about the day center attendees and their families, to see which attendees were the best fit for the study. Inclusion criteria included: (1) mild to severe cognitive impairment as determined by the MMSE with a score of 6–23, (2) age 50 and older, (3) English speaking, (4) interest in interacting with animals (5) and assessment by staff regarding functionality, cooperative behavior, verbal/non-verbal interaction, and physical impairments. The manager of the MWC contacted each family that was recommended by the staff as potential participants in the study, and explained the purpose and process of the project. If the family was interested, written informed consent was obtained during the next regularly scheduled MWC visit by the family caregiver, with an accompanying informed assent from the participant. Fifteen participants were contacted, with 12 participants and their family/caregivers agreeing to join the study and sign the consent form. Exclusion criteria included: (1) not willing or unable to participate in a 12-visit study, (2) not diagnosed with dementia, (3) participant or family/caregiver not willing to sign consent form.

Protection of participants

Participation was voluntary, and there was no penalty if participant or participant’s caregivers wished to withdraw participants from the study. All information was kept confidential. Participants were assigned a number and their data collected was safely locked in a cabinet at the ADC. The electronic data was encrypted and will be kept on a password-protected FAU computer for 5 years, per the university Institutional Review Board guidelines, who approved the proposal as a DNP quality improvement project. Eligibility and enrollment were conducted in private by the project leader and ADC staff, with oversight by the chair community leader.

Intervention

The initial encounter with ADC staff included a private session with the student and CITI trained faculty or community chair members to sign the consent form and complete sociodemographic information, including age, gender, and other chronic diseases. Each participant received their own robotic cat (TIP). They each chose a name for their cats when they first received them, and collars with name tags were given to personalize each pet. The intervention of TIP was used 4 days a week, with 12 visits completed for each participant in a group setting.

Instruments

In addition to the sociodemographic survey, four measures with previously demonstrated strong reliability and validity were used in this study. The following scales were assessed at baseline: the MMSE (Folstein et al., 1975), Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias (AD-RD) Mood Scale (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008), Observed Emotion Rating Scale (OERS) (Lawton et al., 1996), and Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD) (Alexopoulos et al., 1988). In addition, the OERS was completed for each participant immediately after each intervention (n = 12). The MMSE, AD-RD Mood Scale, OERS, and CSDD were assessed again after 12 visits of the intervention. There was also a two to three-week follow-up face-to face discussions with family caregivers and staff.

The four measures, the MMSE, AD-RD mood scale, OERS, and the CSDD, are described below.

The Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE)

The participants’ cognitive status was evaluated using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), a 30-item scale that tests memory, attention, orientation, comprehension, registration, and function (Folstein et al., 1975). The MMSE has been used extensively with strong reliability and validity for testing beyond the beginning stage of dementia, with a Cronbach’s alpha between .80 and .95 across numerous tests (Baek et al., 2016). The MMSE requires only 5 to 10 minutes to administer. A score of 20 to 24 is suggestive of mild dementia, and 13 to 20; moderate dementia. A result of less than 12 is indicative of severe dementia. On average, the MMSE score of a person with Alzheimer’s declines about two to four points each year (Alzheimer’s Association, 2019).

The Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Mood Scale (AD-RD)

The AD-RD Mood Scale was developed to measure positive mood (spirited and contented), positive behavior (affectionate, talkative, and cooperative), negative mood (hostile, apathetic, and sad), and negative behavior (aggression) in individuals with ADRD (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008; Williams et al., 2016). The rating system of the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Mood scale (AD-RD) is 1 (never exhibited) to 5 (always exhibited) and based on direct observation (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008).

Reliability.

In prior studies, strong reliability in the AD-RD Mood Scale was demonstrated through Cronbach’s alpha (α = .89) and test-retest (α = .84) (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008). Interrater reliability for the scale was (α =.78) for positive items and (α = .85) for negative items. Cronbach’s alphas were .92, .90, .85, .77, and .73 for the spirited, hostile, contented, apathetic, and sad subscales consecutively (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008).

Validity.

Moderate (α = .65) concurrent validity was demonstrated through a positive correlation between the AD-RD sad subscale and CSDD (Williams et al., 2016). Discriminate validity was evidenced when measured against MMSE tests for orientation, attention, registration, calculation, recall, and language. Divergent validity was also shown with a moderately negative (α = −.68) correlation between the AD-RD spirited subscale and Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (Williams et al., 2016, p. 534).

Observed Emotion Rating Scale (OERS)

The OERS was developed to measure affect states in older individuals with Alzheimer’s disease, specifically, positive emotions (pleasure and alertness) and negative emotions (anger, anxiety/fear, and sadness) (Chen et al., 2016; Lawton et al., 1996). The use of a face scale allows for direct observation of facial expression, body movement, and other cues that do not depend on self-report, so that caretakers can assess their affect (Lawton et al., 1996).

Reliability and validity.

High reliability for emotions was demonstrated using kappa (Kw =.76 to .89) (Lawton et al., 1996). Validity was evidenced through discriminant correlations between positive states and independent measures of social and other engaged behavior and between negative states and other measures of depression, anger, anxiety, and withdrawal (Lawton et al., 1996, p. P3).

Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD)

This is a 19-item questionnaire developed to rate the symptoms of depression in patients who have dementia. Symptoms are rated on a scale of absent, mild or intermittent, and severe (Alexopoulos et al., 1988; Friedmann et al., 2015). The CSDD showed acceptable internal consistency (α = 0.83) and interrater reliability (Kw = 0.67) (Alexopoulos et al., 1988). The CSDD showed concurrent validity when compared to the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (Politis et al., 2006, p. 1).

The intervention took place over six months, including participant recruitment, staff orientation to review the measures, collection of participants sociodemographic, the actual intervention, data analysis, and post-program evaluation (See Table 1 for a timeline).

Risks and benefits

There were no known risks associated with the use of robotic pet therapy reported in the literature review. There may be a philosophical or ethical issue of using TIP instead of live animals, but this was addressed by informing the participants that this is not a live animal, but rather a robot. This alternative method was used to complement the care this population was already receiving and to aid in their symptoms, but not to replace human contact. Moyle et al. (2013) states this intervention combats depression, loneliness, and dementia-related behaviors, which are usually treated with costly pharmacological treatment and staff resources. Improving mood and cognition with TIP can delay care costs associated with institutionalization by allowing one to age in place.

Since there is no cure for dementia, this project offered a means of addressing the symptoms in a natural way other than the use of pharmacological treatments, which may or may not be effective and have possible detrimental side effects. This intervention was affordable, safe, and noninvasive. With the use of therapeutic pets instead of live pets, there was no concern about the safety of the pet, feeding them, taking them outside, making sure they are up-to-date with their vaccines, etc. Also, there were no fears about participant safety due to possible pet aggression, allergies, tripping over them, and costs associated with the care of a live animal.

Data analysis

The independent variable (IV) was the TIP intervention, and the dependent variables (DV) were (1) the positive moods/behaviors of spirit, content, affectionate, talkative, and cooperative and negative moods/behaviors of hostile, apathetic, sadness, and aggression measured by AD-RD mood scale (2) the emotions of pleasure, anger, anxiety/fear, and sadness measured by OERS (3) mood-related signs, behavioral disturbance, physical signs, cyclic functions, and ideational disturbance measured by the CSDD and (4) cognitive status as measured by MMSE.

Sociodemographic and DV data were summarized using descriptive statistics. Dependent (paired sample) t-tests were used to examine pretest and post-test results in the same group of participants. Pearson’s correlation analysis was used to evaluate if any variables significantly impacted participants’ mood and cognition. Other statistical tests included repeated measures design to evaluate significance of the OERS intervention at multiple time points (Barker et al., 2003). All tests for significance were two-tailed using a probability value of less than .05. All data were analyzed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 26.0 for Windows.

The means and standard deviations of the participants’ age and years of education were calculated. Education was represented as categories; “no education”, “grade school”, “middle school”, “high school”, “college”, “graduate school”, “unknown”. Other sociodemographics (gender, marital status, race/ethnicity, primary language) totals and percentages were calculated. The five categories of cognitive processing of the MMSE (“orientation”, “registration”, “attention and calculation”, “recall”, and “language”) were compared to determine if there were any significant differences in improvement. Five categories of OERS (“pleasure”, “anger”, “anxiety/fear”, “sadness”, and “general alertness”) were analyzed to see if there were any significance using TIP. The categories for AD-RD Mood Scale were the positive moods/behaviors (“spirit”, “content”, “affectionate”, “talkative”, and “cooperative”) and negative moods/behaviors (“hostile”, “apathetic”, “sadness”, and “aggression”) which were analyzed to determine any significance using TIP. The modified CSDD scale of mood-related signs (“anxiety”, “sadness”, “lack of reactivity to pleasant events”, and “irritability”), behavioral disturbances (“agitation”, “retardation”, “multiple physical complaints”, and “loss of interest”), physical signs (“appetite loss”, “weight loss”, and “lack of energy”), cyclic functions (“diurnal variation of mood”), and ideational disturbance (“poor self-esteem”, “pessimism”, and “mood-congruent delusions”) were analyzed to see if there were any significance using TIP.

Results

The sample sociodemographic variables of the N = 12 are represented in Table 2. The majority of participants in the overall sample were female (66.7%), White non-Hispanic (83%), spoke English as their primary language (83.3%), and were widowed (58.3%). All participants (100%) had family caregivers. The average years of education was 13.3 (SD = 5.9) and the average years in age was 79.8 (SD = 14.3).

None of the categorical variables correlated significantly with pre-post test results, meaning for example, that neither gender nor ethnicity influenced results. Of the two continuous sociodemographic variables age and education, age was the only variable that correlated significantly with any of the post-test measures using the Pearson correlation analysis (r = .72, p &lt; .001). Next, we examined the success of this project by evaluating the hypotheses, after determining that 100% of participants enrolled received a robotic companion pet and used it two times a week, over 12 visits for a duration of 30 minutes each, in a group setting.

Hypothesis 1

There will be 80% of participants who will demonstrate a one-point increase in MMSE following the TIP intervention as indicated by pre and post-test MMSE scores (Menna et al., 2016).

Result

These findings were demonstrated using paired sample t-test to show significance of TIP on MMSE, where a higher score shows an improvement in memory. Results showed over half (0.67%; n = 8) of persons scored higher on the MMSE post-test than the pretest, with a positive difference of 1.5, (M = 10.7, SD = 5.5) on the pretest, and (M = 12.2, SD = 7.1) on the post-test. In examining the subscales, there was slight to moderate improvement in attention/calculation, language, and registration, and a slight decrease in orientation and recall as compared to post-test, although not strong enough to indicate significance. Thus, the objective was partially met (Table 3).

Hypothesis 2

There will be 80% of participants who will demonstrate an increased positive mood/behavior following the TIP intervention as indicated by a 60% increase in scores on the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Mood Scale (Tappen &amp; Williams, 2008) and Observed Emotion Rating Scale (Chen et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2013).

Result

These findings were demonstrated using paired samples t-test to show the significant effect of TIP on the AD-RD and OERS, where a higher score shows a more positive mood/behavior. Post-test scores overall on the AD-RD (M = 99.1, SD = 11.8) were six points higher than pretest scores (M = 93.5, SD = 15.3); conditions t(11) = −1.08) overall, although not achieving significance between subjects (p = .304). Thus, the objective for the AD-RD was partially met.

OERS was also assessed, in which higher scores indicated a more positive mood. This survey was conducted to closely monitor for potentially negative effects of the TIP intervention on participant mood. The results of this were overall favorable. Pretest scores (M = 11.9, SD = 2.5) correlated near significance (p = .08) overall, but significantly improved between subjects following the intervention (M = 73.7, SD = 9.6); conditions t(11) = −19.18 p &lt; .001. Thus, the objective for the OERS was met.

We also examined the relationship between the MMSE and subscale post-intervention scores of the CSDD, OERS, and AD-RD. We found multiple significant and strong (&gt; .60) correlations between the 11 subscales of the AD-RD and MMSE following the intervention (see Table 4). Nine categories regarding pleasant mood/behavior correlated favorably with MMSE score, indicating a relationship between positive mood/behavior and increased MMSE.

Repeated measures analysis of the OERS

First we found a significant difference between the means of overall test scores grouped by each visit on the OERS test scores (F(1, 11) = 466.2, p &lt; .01). Next, we conducted repeated measures analysis to determine if there was a significant difference between the five mood variables comprising the OERS at multiple time points. Specifically, we applied the “tests of between-subjects,” to determine if there were significant changes between three or more observations within subjects over time. The Greenhouse-Geisser correction was employed to evaluate validity of the results. We found three variables within the OERS that resulted in significant differences, with a positive increase over time. These were pleasure (F(6, 60) = 4.266, p = .001, η2 = .299), anxiety (F(6, 66) = 3.628, p = .004, η2 = .248), and alertness (F(6, 66) = 4.189, p = .001, η2 = .276). Another observation of note is that although there was a spike in anger at the second and third visit, there was no significant difference in either direction between time points (F(6, 66) = 2.014, p=.076, η2 =.155). In addition, there was an increase of sadness at visit 2, 5, and 6 for two different participants. At visit 2, this was related to joyful tears with one participant speaking to the cat, saying “the cat is looking at me like someone who listens to me and loves me” (F(6, 66)=1.252, p= .292, η2 =.102). During visits 5 and 6, a participant complained that the music was too loud (other participants asked to have the music volume increased). It is noted that there were some external factors that we believe impacted OERS scores. These factors included a tornado warning during the evening discharge time which led to many participants and family members having to wait out the storm, recent falls among two participants impacting memory, and another participant having hip pain leading to aggressive actions. The results of the OERS variables are best represented using Plots graphs, which are available in Figures 2–6.

Hypothesis 3

There will be 80% of participants who will demonstrate decreased depression risk following the TIP intervention as measured by a 60% decrease on the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (Friedmann et al., 2015).

Result

Paired sample t-test analysis of the CSDD, where a lower score indicated less likelihood of depression, revealed similar favorable findings: post-test scores (M = 1.3, SD = 3.4) were significantly higher than pretest scores (M = 8.8, SD = 7.2); conditions t(11) = 4.12, p = .002. Thus, this objective was met (Table 3).

Feedback from participants and family caregivers

An open-ended survey was added to explore participant and family perceptions regarding the TIP project. In vivo coding (Saldaña, 2015) was used to analyze responses. The in vivo coding technique by Saldaña (2015) was chosen as a means of exploring the qualitative responses to the open-ended survey questions asking about previous experiences with pets, and current impressions about the robotic pets. In vivo coding is a holistic approach to investigate the lived experience of the attendee and caregiver. This approach of content analysis allows for “attuning oneself to participant’s language, perspective, and worldview” (p. 66) rather than relying solely on the interpretation of the investigators. Observers also kept notes regarding the participants’ verbal and non-verbal reactions toward their robotic cat.

The process began with both the project leader and faculty advisor separately reading through the transcripts twice to gain a sense of the overall concepts. Each used a word processing program to identify the number of times participants stated specific words, such as “talking” (n = 47 times), and phrases, such as “I am happy” (n = 27 times). A word cloud was created to further explore word frequency findings. The leader and advisor then read the transcripts a third time to identify potential concepts. The only concept that the two reviewers differed on was “home”, and this was reconciled during their next meeting. Further analysis resulted in vivo codes which are summarized in Table 5. Of importance is that the observations that were noted most frequently were smiling and talking to TIP. Rigor was addressed through the separate readings and analysis and joint reconciliation between the reviewers after final consideration and discussion of the data. Member checking was also conducted to see if the caregivers and participants agreed with the findings of the team. The in vivo coding (Saldaña, 2015) allowed for the researchers to more readily see the experience through the lens of the participants.

Participant interactions with TIP

Overall, participants expressed interest while playing with the cats. When first given the cats, two participants were startled initially when the cat did meow or roll over. This fear quickly dissipated throughout the visit and upon handing out the cats on other visits, these participants were anxiously awaiting their cat. In fact, some participants were so anxious to hold their cats, we distributed them before the whole group had arrived.

The visits initially started out with each participant going around the room stating if they owned a pet in the past and saying a memory about their pet. While holding the cat, one participant said, “I have a companion again” and another said to the cat “I like you very much, do you want to go home with me? We could be happy together and have a good time”. When asked how participants felt with the cat, they stated they felt happy and that the cat made them feel good. At the end of one visit, a participant asked when she would be getting her cat back. She even told other clients at the ADC, who were not a part of the study about her cat and said she would introduce them to her cat next time. After the first TIP session, she stated, “this was the best day ever”. Upon the second visit, this participant stated she remembered she had a cat, but did not realize this cat was the same one. Even during her other activities at the ADC, she saw one cat being taken into the other room and inquired as to the location of her own cat.

The TIP project also benefited another participant who had previously expressed frustration that “no-one understands me.” This was likely related to his ability to speak six different languages, but constantly interchanged languages while talking. However, with his cat, he was able to have a conversation and express his concerns. Of note is that this participant was teary-eyed and excused from a group activity to sit and talk with the cat, until he himself stated he was ready to join the group again, no longer teary-eyed or crying.

With another participant, his son reported that his father was being aggressive earlier in the week and had demonstrated a new behavior of hitting his knee in frustration. During the TIP session, it was noted this participant was not aggressive and did not hit his knee during the session. Instead, he held his cat on his lap and spoke about his life while petting the cat. This participant expressed his opinion of how beneficial he thinks it would be to have more of these therapeutic cats in this facility. Another participant was leaving the ADC for the day, almost 2 hours after the TIP session. His aide picked him up and brought him to the car. He ended up sending his aide back into the ADC to get his “talking cat”.

Of all the participants, only two expressed they preferred dogs over cats, but while playing with the cats they both said they would make an exception with the TIP cat. Eight of the caregivers reported that their loved one had slept with the cat, was holding onto the cat when sitting, or consistently plays with the cat. Two of the participants did not take the cat home because one already has two cats at home, and the other stated he wanted to share the cat with other clients at the ADC. One participant’s daughter reported that during a hospitalization, her mother slept with the cat next to her and that it was a good distraction.

Discussion

Barriers/challenges

Potential barriers to this project included participant resistance to engaging in robotic pets, attrition of residents due to declining health, and resistance of staff to support the project. To navigate past these barriers, the ADC staff guided us in selecting participants who demonstrated interest in new activities and who were unlikely to experience a rapid progression of illness. The staff previously expressed excitement to the project, so it was anticipated that this project would be well received.

Limitations included the small sample size, and that different people administered the MMSE pre/post-test. There may have been some variance in inter-rater reliability, which could be addressed in future projects by having consistent non-study personnel conduct the MMSE evaluation. Also, the MMSE post-test was done immediately after TIP, so a potential increase in endorphins may have artificially inflated the score.

Unintentional external negative influences included external factors such as recent falls at home, and a tornado warning occurring at the end of the day, causing confusion for participants who were delayed in going home. It is unknown if the lower barometric pressure often seen in severe storms could have affected participants. For another participant, hip pain may have contributed to a participant acting out in an aggressive manner.

Strengths of the project

Results from this therapeutic and affordable pet intervention were positive. The cost for these publicly available therapeutic pets is substantially less than others built specifically for medical use. Also, TIP provided participants with an alternative way to express themselves. It appeared to provide participants with a companion, as they often spoke to the pet and shared their feelings. In one sense, as participants seemed to believe that the pet was responding to their statements through meowing, turning their head, or blinking their eyes, they were “having a conversation” with the pet. The pets provided a means of entertainment. The participants also shared evoked memories involving previous pets they owned. As a group activity, it provided opportunities for the participants to communicate with each other, particularly in the Wednesday/Friday group. Tuesday/Thursday group did show improvement in mood and risk for depression as measured by OERS and CSDD and a 50% increase in MMSE score while using TIP. Wednesday/Friday group demonstrated an even higher improvement (83%) in increased MMSE score. This may be related to an anecdotal observation that the Wednesday/Friday group was more socially interactive with each other than the Tuesday/Thursday group, although there was no significant difference in group MMSE scores or daily activities. With the aid of music, this group interacted more with their cats by holding them on their laps and singing to them.

One participant was known to ask for her daughter constantly throughout the day. She was placed into the group with hopes that TIP would be a great distraction along with improving her cognition and positive emotions. During the intervention, she did ask about her daughter, but less during the intervention. It was noticed that this participant was more engaged when she was one on one with the leader or another BSN-DNP student. The success of the one-on-one attention strategy was not uniquely related to using the pet. There was no change between pre-post MMSE nor OERS result in this participant. However, there was a 5-point decrease in pre-post CSDD and 6-point decrease in pre-post AD-RD mood scale in this attendee.

During one visit, a participant was separated from her friend to join another activity, and became very upset, she even stated she could kill herself. We encouraged her to sit down and gave her the cat as a distraction. Immediately, the participant began petting and brushing her cat. During this interaction, the participant said, “this is wonderful” and said to the cat “thank you my love”. After the session, we brought her to her friend, and she was happy. This interaction occurred after a recent fall and the participant noted a decline in her memory. However, she still had an increase in MMSE by 5 points post intervention.

Recommendations

Since there were no known risks from this intervention and only positive outcomes were seen, using TIP was shown as a means of a safe alternative for decreasing unfavorable behavioral and psychological symptoms, and possibly improving memory, in individuals who are living with dementia. Utilizing these therapeutic cats daily can provide improvement in positive mood/behaviors and decrease in negative mood/behaviors, increase in MMSE scores, and distraction when needed. TIP is recommended if a participant is having difficulty engaging during a group activity, as having a staff member work with the participant who is agitated in a private room with the cat was shown to be beneficial in several instances. Ultimately, improving participant’s overall BPSD may improve the family/caregiver’s quality of life.

A modification that might be beneficial would be to offer therapeutic interactive dogs in addition to the cats. There were some participants in this study who preferred dogs over cats. In the beginning these members expressed their dislike of cats, but they eventually warmed to the robotic cat. Giving the choice between cats or dogs may produce even greater results, depending on participant preference.

Conclusion

In summary, this nurse-practitioner-led program at the ADC was beneficial to the attendees participating in TIP. This was evidenced through the increase in MMSE scores, positive mood/behavior as shown by the AD-RD mood scale and OERS and decrease in depression risk as shown by CSDD scale. Qualitative feedback showed participants enjoyed interacting with TIP. TIP provided them with a companion and allowed them to express their feelings and provided a sense of comfort. TIP offered a safe alternative to help improve the behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. Evaluation of this intervention is currently being extended to home-based settings due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, as isolation among older adults struggling with dementia and their family caregivers has greatly increased. Regardless, our goal is to see this approach to improving mood and behaviors offered to more ADC attendees once quarantine restrictions are released.

Acknowledgements

A special thank you to Ageless Innovation, Joy for All Pets, for their support.

Funding

Funding was received by Sigma Iota Xi Chapter of Sigma International Nursing Honor Society and National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Aging, K01 AG064047-01.

Figure 1. Project Conceptual Framework - Caring in Nursing using TIP.

Figure 2. Plot of OERS variable, pleasure. This figure illustrates the increase in pleasure over time among participants during the TIP intervention.

Figure 3. Plot of OERS variable, anger. This figure illustrates the overall decrease in anger over time among participants during the TIP intervention.

Figure 4. Plot of OERS variable, anxiety/fear. This figure illustrates the overall decrease in anxiety and fear over time among participants during the TIP intervention.

Figure 5. Plot of OERS variable, sadness. This figure illustrates the overall decrease in sadness over time among participants during the TIP intervention.

Figure 6. Plot for OERS variable, alertness. This figure illustrates the increase in alertness over time among participants during the TIP intervention.

Table 1. Time of activities.

Month	Activity	
1	Meetings with day center staff to discuss plan and protocols	
2	Recruitment of participants with input from staff
Staff orientation to Study Protocols and Measures	
3	Consents, Sociodemographic, and Pre-Intervention Data Collection (MMSE, OERS, CSDD, AD-RD)	
4	Tip Intervention
Data Collection: OERS after each intervention
Data Collection: OERS, CSDD, AD-RD and MMSE post-intervention	
5	Data Analysis	
6	Follow-up with family caregivers
Post-program evaluation with staff	

Table 2. Categorical and continuous variables (N = 12).

Gender	n		Percent (%)		
   Male	4		33.3		
   Female	8		66.7		
Primary Language					
   English	10		  8.3		
   Spanish	1		  8.3		
   Creole	1		  8.3		
Caregiver					
   Yes	12		 100		
   No	0		  0		
Ethnicity					
   Hispanic American	1		  8.3		
   White, non-Hispanic	10		   83		
   Other	1		  8.3		
Education Level					
   Middle school	1		  8.3		
   High school	5		41.7		
   College	2		16.7		
   Graduate school	3		   25		
   Unknown	1		  8.3		
Marital Status					
   Single	1		  8.3		
   Married	4		33.3		
   Widowed	7		58.3		
	M	SD	Minimum	Maximum	
	
Age	79.8	14.3	50	94	
Years of Education	13.3	  5.9	  0	21	

Table 3. Paired sample t-test results of the AD-RD, CSDD, OERS, and MMSE.

Test	Pretest M/SD	Post-test M/SD	t value (DF = 11)	Significance	
AD-RD	  93.5/15.3	 99.1/11.8	    −1.08	    .304	
CSDD	  8.8/7.2	 1.3/3.4	   4.12	   .002*	
OERS	  11.9/2.5	 73.7/9.6	  −19.18	   .000*	
MMSE	  10.7/5.5	 12.2/7.1	    −1.54	    .151	
* Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

Notes: AD-RD = Alzheimer’s Disease Related Disorders Mood Score, CSDD = Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia, OERS = Observed Emotion Rating Scale, MMSE = Mini Mental Status Exam.

Table 4. Post TIP intervention significant correlations between MMSE* and in the ADRD* subscale.

ADRD subscales	Correlation (R) with post-MMSE scores	
Quiet	        (−.67)*	
Depressed	        (−.78)**	
Jovial	       (.74)**	
Enthusiastic	       (.72)**	
Wants attention	       (.62)*	
Sense of humor	       (.83)**	
Euphoric	       (.78)**	
Wants affection	       (.60)*	
Affectionate	       (.78)**	
Likes to be busy	       (.60)*	
Talkative	       (.74)**	
Total	       (.72)**	
* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

Notes. MMSE = Mini-Mental State Exam.

AD-RD = Alzheimer’s Disease Related Disorders Mood Score.

Table 5. In vivo coding of participant responses.

Possible themes	Participant statements	Selected in vivo code	
Not Alone	• He is a very good companion.
• You will not get bored because I stay at home often—you will be my companion as long as you don’t dirty my house.
• I want to buy cats for others, and my brother.
• I’m so happy I can take my cat anywhere.
• He wants to go home—ok I will take you home.
• Nobody will be here [ADC] anymore because we will be home with the cats.	I have a companion again.	
Love	• Everybody loves you and we want you to be happy.
• Daddy loves you.
• I am in love with my cat as if it was real.
• The cat is looking at me like someone who listens to me and loves me.
• Thank you my love.
• Do you love me?	I love you too.	
Talking	• You are a nice little boy.
• How is your cat doing? (to other participant).
• I don’t like it (referring to the way the cat looked at her).
• Wake up (and pulled on cat’s leg).
• Meowing (many meowed at cat).
• (Sang): You are my sunshine.	I like talking to my cat.	
Happiness	• We could be happy together and have a good time.
• The cat is happy.
• I am happy.
• The cat can make me happy again.
• Glad you’re happy because I am happy too.
• This was the best day.	I am happy too.	

Declaration of interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


References

Alexopoulos GS , Abrams RC , Young RC , &amp; Shamoian CA (1988). Cornell scale for depression in dementia. Biological Psychiatry, 23 (3 ), 271–284. 10.1016/0006-3223(88)90038-8 3337862
Alzheimer’s Association. (2019). Medical tests: Tests for Alzheimer’s and dementia. https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/diagnosis/medical_tests
Alzheimer’s Disease International. (2018). About dementia. https://www.alz.co.uk/about-dementia
Baek M , Kim K , Park K , &amp; Kim S (2016). The validity and reliability of the mini-mental state examination-2 for detecting mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease in a Korean population. PLOS One, 11 (9 ), 1–19. 10.1371/journal.pone.0163792
Barker S , Pandurangi A , &amp; Best AI (2003). Effects of animal-assisted therapy on patients’ anxiety, fear, and depression before ECT. The Journal of ECT, 19 (1 ), 38–44. 10.1097/00124509-200303000-00008 12621276
Boykin A , &amp; Schoenhofer SO (2001). Nursing as caring: A model for transforming practice. Jones &amp; Bartlett Learning.
Chen H , Li J , Wei Y , Chen P , &amp; Li H (2016). Effects of timeslips on Cornell scale for depression in dementia scores of senile dementia patients. International Journal of Nursing Sciences, 3 (1 ), 35–38. 10.1016/j.ijnss.2016.01.001
Florida Alzheimer’s Statistics. (2018). Alzheimer’s statistics. https://www.alz.org/media/Documents/florida-alzheimers-facts-figures-2018.pdf
Folstein MF , Folstein SE , &amp; McHugh PR . (1975). Mini-mental state: A practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12 (3 ), 189–198. 10.1016/0022-3956(75)90026-6 1202204
Friedmann E , Galik E , Thomas S , Hall S , Chung S , &amp; McCune S (2015). Evaluation of pet-assisted living intervention for improving functional status in assisted living residents with mild to moderate cognitive impairment: A pilot study. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 30 (3 ), 276–289. 10.1177/1533317514545477
Gaugler J , James B , Johnson T , Marin A , &amp; Weuve J (2019). 2019 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s &amp; Dementia, 15 (3 ), 321–387.
Jøranson N , Pedersen I , Rokstad AMM , &amp; Ihlebaek C (2015). Effects on symptoms of agitation and depression in persons with dementia participating in robot-assisted activity: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 16 (10 ), 867–873. 10.1016/j.jamda.2015.05.002 26096582
Kales H , Gitlin L , &amp; Lyketsos C (2015). Assessment and management of behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia. BMJ (Clinical Research ed.), 350 (369 ), h369–16. 10.1136/bmj.h369
Kanamori M , Suzuki M , Yamamoto K , Kanda M , Matsui Y , Kojima E , Fukawa H , Sugita T , &amp; Oshiro H (2001a). A day care program and elevation of animal-assisted therapy (AAT) for the elderly with senile dementia. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease &amp; Other Dementias, 16 (4 ), 234–239. 10.1177/153331750101600409
Kanamori M , Suzuki M , Yamamoto K , Kanda M , Matsui Y , Kozima E , Takeuchi S , &amp; Oshiro H (2001b). Evaluation of animal-assisted therapy for the elderly with senile dementia in a day care program. Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. Japanese Journal of Geriatrics, 38 (5 ), 659–664. 10.3143/geriatrics.38.659 11605215
Kennedy-Malone L , Martin-Plank L , &amp; Duffy E (2019). Advanced practice nursing in the care of older adults (2nd ed.). F. A. Davis Company.
Lawton P , Haitsma K , &amp; Klapper J (1996). Observed affect in nursing home residents with Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Science, 51B (1 ), P3–P14.
Lee K , Algase D , &amp; McConnell E (2013). Daytime observed emotional expressions of people with dementia. Nursing Research, 62 (4 ), 218–225. 10.1097/NNR.0b013e31829999d7 23817279
Liang A , Piroth I , Robinson H , MacDonald B , Fisher M , Nater UM , Skoluda N , &amp; Broadbent E (2017). A pilot randomized trial of a companion robot for people with dementia living in the community. Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, 18 (10 ), 871–878. 10.1016/j.jamda.2017.05.019 28668664
Locsin R (2017). The co-existence of technology and caring in the theory of technological competency as caring in nursing. The Journal of Medical Investigation, 64 (1.2 ), 160–164. 10.2152/jmi.64.160 28373615
Locsin RC (2005). Technological competency as caring in nursing: A model for practice. Sigma Theta Tau International.
Locsin R , &amp; Purnell M (2009). A contemporary nursing process: The (un)bearable weight of knowing in nursing. Springer Publishing Company, LLC.
Menna L , Santaniello A , Gerardi F , Di Maggio A , &amp; Milan G (2016). Evaluation of the efficacy of animal-assisted therapy based on the reality orientation therapy protocol in Alzheimer’s disease patients: A pilot study. Psychogeriatrics, 16 (4 ), 240–246. 10.1111/psyg.12145 26370064
Moyle W , Cooke M , Beattie E , Jones C , Klein B , Cook G , &amp; Gray C (2013). Exploring the effect of companion robots on emotional expression in older adults with dementia: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 39 (5 ), 46–53. 10.3928/00989134-20130313-03
Moyle W , Jones C , Murfield J , Thalib L , Beattie E , Shum D , O’Dwyer S , Mervin C , &amp; Draper B (2017). Use of a robotic seal as a therapeutic tool to improve dementia symptoms: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. JAMDA, 18 (9 ), 766–773. 10.1016/j.jamda.2017.03.018 28780395
National Adult Day Services Association. (2018). Overview and facts. https://www.nadsa.org/consumers/overview-and-facts/
Politis A , Maillis A , Thomadaki O , Passa M , Stamouli E , Kotrotsou M , Kontoaggellos K , &amp; Soldatos C (2006). Validity and reliability of the newly translated Cornell scale for depression in dementia (CSDD) applied to Greek outpatients with depression and depression and Alzheimer’s disease. Annals of General Psychiatry, 5 (S1 ), S245. 10.1186/1744-859X-5-S1-S245
Pope W , Hunt C , &amp; Ellison K (2016). Animal assisted therapy for elderly residents of a skilled nursing facility. Journal of Nursing Education and Practice, 6 (9 ), 56–62. 10.5430/jnep.v6n9p56
Preez J , Millsteed J , Marquis R , &amp; Richmond J (2018). The role of adult day services in supporting the occupational participation of people with dementia and their carers: An integrative review. Healthcare, 6 (43 ), 1–15. 10.3390/healthcare6020043 28673816
Saldaña J (2015). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage.
Sicurella T , &amp; Fitzsimmons V (2016). Robotic pet therapy in long-term care. Nursing, 46 (6 ), 55–57. 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000482265.32133.f6
Tappen R , &amp; Williams C (2008). Development and testing of the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias Mood Scale. Nursing Research, 57 (6 ), 426–435. 10.1097/NNR.0b013e31818c3dcc 19018217
Williams C , Tappen R , Wiese L , Newman D , Corbett M , Pinos S , Curtis B , &amp; Murray B (2016). Stress in persons with dementia: Benefits of a memory center day program. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 30 (5 ), P531–P538. 10.1016/j.apnu.2016.04.011
