LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101231978
33173
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimers Dement
Alzheimer's &amp; dementia : the journal of the Alzheimer's Association
1552-5260
1552-5279

34908231
9198106
10.1002/alz.12523
NIHMS1802298
Article
In situ spatial glycomic imaging of mouse and human Alzheimer’s disease brains
Hawkinson Tara R. 1
Clarke Harrison A. 1
Young Lyndsay E. A. 23
Conroy Lindsey R. 1
Markussen Kia H. 2
Kerch Kayla M. 1
Johnson Lance A. 46
Nelson Peter T. 56
Wang Chi 37
Allison Derek B. 35
Gentry Matthew S. 23
Sun Ramon C. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3009-1850
136
1 Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
2 Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
3 Markey Cancer Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
4 Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
5 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
6 Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
7 Department of Biostatistics, College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Conceptualization, Ramon C. Sun; Methodology, Ramon C. Sun and Matthew S. Gentry; Investigation, Tara R. Hawkinson, Ramon C. Sun, Lyndsay E. A. Yong, Kia H. Markussen, Kayla M. Kerch, Chi Wang, Lindsey R. Conroy, Lance A. Johnson, Peter T. Nelson, Derek B. Allison, and Harrison A. Clarke; Writing (Original Draft), Tara R. Hawkinson, Ramon C. Sun, and Matthew S. Gentry; Writing (Review &amp; Editing), Ramon C. Sun, Tara R. Hawkinson, Lyndsay E. A. Young, Lindsey R. Conroy, and Matthew S. Gentry; Funding Acquisition, Ramon C. Sun and Matthew S. Gentry; Resources, Ramon C. Sun and Matthew S. Gentry; Supervision, Ramon C. Sun.

Correspondence: Ramon C. Sun, Department of Neuroscience BBSRB B179, University of Kentucky, 741 South Limestone Street, KY 40536-0509, Lexington, KY 40536-0509, USA. ramon.sun@uky.edu
15 5 2022
10 2022
15 12 2021
01 10 2023
18 10 17211735
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
N-linked protein glycosylation in the brain is an understudied facet of glucose utilization that impacts a myriad of cellular processes including resting membrane potential, axon firing, and synaptic vesicle trafficking. Currently, a spatial map of N-linked glycans within the normal and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) human brain does not exist. A comprehensive analysis of the spatial N-linked glycome would improve our understanding of brain energy metabolism, linking metabolism to signaling events perturbed during AD progression, and could illuminate new therapeutic strategies. Herein we report an optimized in situ workflow for enzyme-assisted, matrix-assisted laser desorption and ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) of brain N-linked glycans. Using this workflow, we spatially interrogated N-linked glycan heterogeneity in both mouse and human AD brains and their respective age-matched controls. We identified robust regional-specific N-linked glycan changes associated with AD in mice and humans. These data suggest that N-linked glycan dysregulation could be an underpinning of AD pathologies.

bioenergetics
carbohydrate metabolism
MALDI imaging
neuronal function
N-linked glycosylation
synaptic transmission

pmc1 | NARRATIVE

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an incurable neurological disorder with major mortality and socioeconomic burden worldwide.1 The onset of AD increases in incidence with age,2 and an increasing aging demographic means that the number of individuals with AD will expand rapidly. AD is clinically characterized by its severe behavioral impairment and memory loss. Current understanding of AD etiology focuses on event sequelae that start with plaque pathologies such as amyloid beta (Aβ) and hyperphosphorylated tau neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs),3–5 in addition to inflammatory processes such as gliosis and microglial activation, which ultimately drive the massive loss of synaptic connectivity and eventual neuronal cell death.6–11 The loss of neuronal connectivity is the critical feature and the most proximal neurobiological event that accounts for cognitive impairment.

The brain accounts for 1.5% of total body weight yet consumes 20% of daily caloric demand.12 Glucose is the primary fuel source for brain metabolism,13–16 and its availability and proper utilization are critical for synaptic communication and normal brain homeostasis.17–19 Within the brain, neurons account for 50% of total cell number20 yet they consume up to 75% to 80% of glucose within the brain.21,22 The brain relies on glucose breakdown via oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) for ATP generation both as an energy medium, converting ATP to ADP, and as a neurotransmitter through synaptic release and binding to purinoreceptors. The major brain energy demands are associated with neuronal signaling such as resting potential, action potential, membrane hyperpolarization, postsynaptic receptor trafficking, glutamate cycling, and postsynaptic calcium signaling that account for ≈70% of the calculated energy expense, with nonsignaling activities consuming an estimated 30%.23 This energy segregation is also true spatially, as gray matter containing concentrated neuronal cell bodies exhibit a substantially higher metabolic rate and ATP consumption rate than white matter, which has a higher fraction of nonsignaling glial cells.24

Brain glucose hypometabolism, characterized by decreased 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake as quantified by positron emission tomography (PET) imaging, is now considered a clinical hallmark of dementia.25 Clinical AD symptoms are linked intimately with glucose hypometabolism, and the degree of glucose hypometabolism correlates strongly with the severity of symptoms.26–28 Recent discoveries in neurometabolism suggest brain carbohydrate dysregulation as a critical process underpinning multiple AD pathologies, and manipulating carbohydrate metabolism may be an untapped target in delaying or reversing the symptoms of AD.29

The three primary facets of glucose metabolism in the brain are: (1) central carbon metabolism that drives glycolysis and the Krebs cycle to produce ATP and neurotransmitters such as γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), glutamine, glutamate, and N-Acetylaspartic acid (NAA); (2) glycogen biosynthesis; and (3) N-linked glycan production. These processes are metabolically channeled and a shift in one results in perturbations of the other two.30,31 Central carbon metabolism or OxPhos in the context of AD has been characterized extensively,22,32,33 and the role of glycogen metabolism in synaptic plasticity during aging and dementia is an emerging area of interest.34,35 N-linked glycan biosynthesis is an understudied route of brain glucose metabolism, but it plays critical roles in neuronal processes from regulating action potential to synaptic transmission.36

N-linked glycans are sugar decorations on proteins that impact protein function, trafficking, and interactions.37,38 N-linked glycosylation consumes a significant portion of intracellular glucose for the production of interconnected sugar molecules as part of a process to permanently modify proteins.39 The biosynthesis of N-linked glycans stems from glucose metabolism in the cytoplasm and continues through the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi, with many glycans becoming terminal modifications of membrane proteins.40 N-linked glycans regulate neurotransmitter release and the formation of new synapses through the turnover and stability of brain glycoproteins such as synapsin 1.41 In addition, the expression of the glycosylation enzymes α2-fucosyltransferases (FUT1 and FUT2) are required in synapse formation and neurite outgrowth.42,43 Up to 30% of the total mass of a voltage-gated sodium or potassium ion channel is N-linked glycans.44 N-linked glycan modifications and ATP concentrations are utilized by a neuron to fine tune the membrane polarization and action potential transmission within an axon.36 For example, sialylated N-linked glycan modifications are among the most potent modulators of neuronal excitability through modulation of electrostatic properties of both voltage-gated sodium and potassium ion channels.45,46 Voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) are another class of glycoproteins that are critical for synaptic transmission. Different VGCC isoforms can contain upward of six unique N-linked glycosylation sites in the extracellular domain. Collectively, N-linked glycosylation of VGCCs regulate channel trafficking to the membrane and VGCC activity and potentiation.47 N-linked glycan co-translational modifications are also linked to many cognitive processes including learning and memory formation.48–50 In hippocampal neurons, N-linked glycan structures are characterized as a major component of learning and long-term potentiation, critical for memory formation.51,52

There are &gt;125 human disorders linked to mutations in glycosylation genes known as congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs),53,54 and the vast majority exhibit neurological defects including neurodegeneration, cognitive impairment, epilepsy, and memory defects.53–55 A recent report of the glycoproteome from the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) of AD patients revealed global changes in N-linked glycoprotein profiles56 and alluded to aberrant N-glycan metabolism as a biomarker and an area of interest in AD progression. To this end, a detailed spatial map of N-linked glycan changes in AD has not been performed in AD mouse models or human AD specimens. This analysis is needed to define how AD glucose hypometabolism relates to fundamental changes in N-linked glycosylation. This work could stimulate new hypotheses regarding how metabolic perturbations impact neuronal signaling throughout the course of cognitive and memory decline during AD.

In this study, we examined spatial changes in N-linked glycosylation in both AD mouse models and human AD specimens compared to their respective controls. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) is an emerging technology that enables in situ spatial analysis of proteomics,57 metabolomics,58 and lipidomics.59 Enzyme-assisted MALDI-MSI is the latest development in this imaging technology that expands the MALDI-MSI capability to formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue blocks. The application of peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGaseF) to FFPE tissue sections prior to matrix application and MALDI-MSI has enabled comprehensive in situ spatial-glycomics profiling in multiple tissue types.60–64 Enzyme-assisted MALDI-MSI has been applied to an array of different tumor types with remarkable spatial resolution that allows for separation of tumor and stromal metabolic discrepancies.61,65,66 Although spatial glycomics analysis has been reported in mouse brains, current reports do not achieve the spatial definition observed in cancer studies.67 We hypothesized that this decreased resolution was due to high levels of charged N-linked glycans containing terminal sialic acids, which are considerably more abundant in the brain compared to other tissues.68,69 We reduced the phosphate salt concentration in the PNGaseF buffer used for dry-spraying to test if this adjustment resulted in improved N-linked glycan signals and spatial definition. Indeed, lowering the phosphate salt by 10-fold boosted glycan signal by 25% when recorded by time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Figure 1B). It is important to note that this modification substantially improved the ability to spatially analyze N-linked glycans in the mouse brain. With a reduced salt concentration, we now could distinguish cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum, which was not possible previously (Figure 1C).

We applied this improved workflow first to the analysis of two mouse models with common AD pathologies: Aβ accumulation (5xFAD) and tauopathy (rTg4510) compared to their age- and sex-matched controls (wild-type [WT]). Mouse brains were fixed in 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin; adjacent brain sections (4 μm) were prepared for both MALDI-MSI and hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) staining. Using H&amp;E as a guide, we performed targeted analysis of three separate regions of interests within the frontal cortex and hippocampus of mouse brains, as these regions are often affected in brains with severe AD pathology. We performed multivariant analyses that include partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) and clustering heatmap analysis, and each statistical method separates WT from both AD models. We then performed variable importance in projection (VIP) analysis to identify the most significantly changed N-linked glycans by VIP score. Strikingly, the vast majority of N-linked glycans highlighted by VIP analysis were increased in both AD models (Figure 2C), suggesting a hyper-N-linked glycosylation phenotype in the AD mouse brain. The increases in N-linked glycans are observed in both the frontal cortex and hippocampus of the two AD mouse models demonstrated by volcano plot analysis, despite differing pathologies in these models (Figures 2 &amp; 3, S3–S4). No major differences were observed between the two AD models with respect to N-linked glycans. Thus our data suggest that aberrant glycan metabolism could be a universal feature of neurodegeneration and dementia and is independent of genetic mutations driving Aβ plaques or tau tangles.

AD mouse models do not faithfully recapitulate many of the human AD pathologies and symptoms, evidenced by multiple therapeutics that have shown promising efficacy in mouse models yet performed poorly in clinical trials.70–72 The robust hyperglycosylation observed in the two AD mouse models raised the interesting question of whether human specimens would display the same phenotype. We obtained three AD and three age-matched controls of human frontal cortex samples from the middle frontal gyrus Brodmann area 9 and hippocampal tissue from the University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center. The samples contained Aβ plaques and were Thal Aβ stage &gt;3 with tau pathologies and Braak NFT Stage VI (Table S2). Samples were treated with PNGase F, followed by matrix application and MALDI-MSI analysis. In the human frontal cortex, the glycan abundance was higher in the gray matter region compared to white matter, suggesting that N-linked glycans are expressed more in neurons (Figure 4). This conclusion is further supported by the neuronal cell layers within CA1, CA2, CA3, and Ammon’s horn of human hippocampal regions that displayed increased N-linked glycan abundance compared to the surrounding glial cell layers (Figure 5). When AD specimens were compared with normal specimens, we observed protein hyper-N-linked glycosylation in the frontal cortex regions of human AD specimens similar to mouse models of AD (Figure 6). Strikingly, the hippocampal regions of human AD brains exhibited a dramatic downregulation in N-linked glycans compared to age-matched controls, which is the opposite of what was observed in the AD mouse models. This phenotype highlights a fundamental difference between (1) N-linked glycan metabolism between AD mouse models and human AD patients specifically in the hippocampal region and (2) regionally specific differences between the frontal cortex and hippocampus in human AD patients compared to matched controls. Specifically, hyperglycosylation is observed in the gray matter regions of the frontal cortex during AD and hypoglycosylation is observed in the hippocampal regions during AD.

In this study, we performed MALDI-MSI to define the spatial N-linked glycan changes within the brains of both mouse AD models and human specimens. The most impactful findings are: (1) the development of an improved enzyme-assisted MALDI-MSI workflow designed for spatial mapping of brain N-linked glycans; (2) the identification of spatially heterogeneous aberrant N-linked glycans as an AD clinical hallmark; (3) discovering hyperglycosylation as a phenotype of AD mouse models and human frontal cortex specimens; and (4) establishing that human AD hippocampi exhibit opposing changes in N-linked glycans compared to both human AD frontal cortex and AD mouse hippocampi. Given the intimate connection between N-linked glycan biosynthesis and glucose utilization and the critical roles that N-linked glycans play in synaptic activity of a neuron, our findings support the need for an in-depth interrogation of the signaling and metabolic roles of N-linked glycans in AD.

N-linked glycan biosynthesis connects directly to glucose utilization by the shared glycolytic substrate fructose-6-phosphate, which is required for the production of UDP-N-acetyl-glucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) through the hexosamine pathway.73,74 Recent studies in cancer cells suggest that the carbon flow between glycolysis and the hexosamine pathway are channeled and that an increase in one often leads to a decrease in the other.75 Previous studies have reported decreased glucose uptake in the human brain during AD, specifically in the neurons.21 These findings coupled with the significantly altered N-linked glycans observed in both gray matter and hippocampi neuronal layers, lead to the hypothesis that dysregulation of OxPhos and N-linked glycan biosynthesis partially contributes to the energy imbalance in the AD brain. The next steps should focus on defining glucose utilization and the flux between central carbon metabolism, glycogen cycling, and N-linked glycan biosynthesis during AD progression. Based on our data, there should be a strong focus on neuronal or glial cell–type dependent analyses as well as focusing on identifying metabolic differences between neurons of the frontal cortical and hippocampal regions during AD progression. The use of stable isotope-resolve metabolomics in AD mouse models would be a complementary technique to reveal the exact carbon flow of glucose through multiple metabolic pathways including central carbon and hexosamine pathways.76

Dysregulation of N-linked glycosylation is a primary driver of the unfolded protein response and ER stress. The well-known ER stress inducers tunicamycin and thapsigargin are inhibitors of N-linked glycan synthesis through the blockade of UDP-GlcNAc transporters on the ER77 or inhibitors that prevent N-linked glycan transfer to proteins through calcium interruption, respectively.78 ER stress is an established inducer of neuronal hyperexcitability and eventual neuronal cell death during AD.79–81 However, the upstream signaling events that lead to ER stress are unknown. Regionally specific changes of N-linked glycans in AD give rise to the hypothesis that energy imbalance between central carbon metabolism and N-linked glycosylation is a driver of ER stress and subsequent neuronal cell death during AD. Future directions should include exploring changes in ER metabolism during AD and identifying signaling and epigenetic pathways affected by ER stress that contribute to neuronal functions. In addition, ER stress has been shown to be a potent inducer of neuroinflammation, driving gliosis and microglia activation.82–84 The impact of aberrant N-linked glycans should be interrogated in these cell types in different brain regions as well.

Balanced production of ATP and N-linked glycan is crucial for the regulation of a myriad of neuronal functions, including membrane hyperpolarization, synaptic vessel transport, new synaptic formation, and voltage-gated ion channel activity.36 Loss of neuronal functions and synaptic connectivity are primary neurobiological events connecting memory loss and AD.85 Although glucose metabolism has been implicated in driving the loss of neuronal processes, signaling events connecting metabolism to neurobiology remain to be discovered. Aberrant N-linked glycan metabolism could be one of the underpinning mechanisms whereby energy imbalance drives loss of neuronal function. For example, the synaptic vesicle proteins SV2 and synaptotagmin 1 are vesicle membrane protein responders for neurotransmitter transport and calcium sensing, respectively. N-linked glycosylation is required for the targeted integration of both proteins to synaptic vesicles.86,87 Aberrant N-linked glycosylation in either cortical or hippocampal neurons would have detrimental effects on both neurotransmitter loading and synaptic release, resulting in loss of synaptic connectivity. Future experiments should focus on identifying proteins impacted by aberrant N-linked glycosylation during AD progression, which can improve our understanding of how energy imbalance will drive neuronal dysfunction and loss of synaptic transmission.

Within a neuron, the control of calcium influx is critical for synaptic vesicle release and the propagation of action potentials. Dysregulation of calcium signaling is well documented during aging and dementia, and forms the basis for the AD calcium hypothesis.88 Indeed, calciumdependent slow afterhyperpolarization (AHP) is delayed in both aging and AD rodent models.89,90 VGCCs rely on glycosylation for trafficking and activity,47 and aberrant N-linked glycosylation of VGCCs could alter intracellular calcium concentration and induce changes in depolarization-repolarization cycles that result in neurodegeneration. Aberrant glycosylation of VGCCs and calcium signaling could be amplified even further during the activation of ischemic cascade and hypoglycemic conditions such as stroke, which has proven to be a significant risk factor for dementia.91 Therapeutics that can normalize N-linked glycosylation in the AD brain could have the opportunity to restore neuronal function through the correction of voltage gated ion channel activities.

Limitations of the study are: (1) The range of detection from the quadrupole time-of-flight that excludes larger, complex glycans from our analysis. These N-linked glycans should be evaluated further using Fourier transform–based mass spectrometry instruments. (2) Our analyses focus on age, sex, and pathology matched and controlled mouse and human specimens. Therefore, both the sample size and degree of disease progression are limited. AD is a heterogeneous disease, and future studies should include larger cohorts and more diverse human specimens as well as testing of additional AD mouse models. These analyses can test the conclusions and hypotheses drawn from the current work regarding N-linked glycan perturbation in aging and other well-known AD pathological parameters. (3) Most AD patients are diagnosed with other dementia-related pathologies postmortem such as hippocampal sclerosis, age-related tauopathy, argyrophilic grain disease, limbic-predominant age-related TDP-43 encephalopathy and more.92 Therefore, a large, meta-analysis of human AD specimens is warranted that includes a wider range of dementia diagnoses and defines the association between unique N-linked glycans and terminal pathologies and prognoses.

Recently, Lee et al. examined the N-linked glycome in the normal human and mouse using dissected brain regions followed by pooled liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis.93 They elegantly demonstrated regional-specific and age-specific glycan changes in the human brain. For example, sialylated and fucosylated glycans were enriched in the frontal cortical regions.93 Although lacking spatial resolution for fine brain structure, this study highlighted the heterogeneous nature of N-linked glycans in the brain. Our study utilized an in situ MALDI-MSI technology to interrogate spatial changes in N-linked glycan in cortical and hippocampal regions of AD mouse and human brains. We identified robust changes in N-linked glycans in both the frontal cortex and the hippocampal regions of AD brains compared to age-matched controls. We demonstrate that N-linked glycan distribution is heterogeneous in the human brain and pathological changes in N-linked glycans are spatially dependent during AD. Future studies should include the definition of cell types within the central nervous system that contribute to the aberrant N-linked glycan phenotypes, a detailed map of glucose utilization through diverse metabolic pathways in unique cell populations and regions of the AD brain and define the signaling pathways affected by aberrant N-linked glycan metabolism that drives the loss of synaptic connectivity in dementia. Furthermore, it would be interesting to define the temporal changes in N-linked glycans in mild to severe cognitively impaired individuals using both biofluids and post-mortem tissues. Collectively, the discovery of heterogeneous aberrant N-linked glycosylation in AD offers a promising path for the discovery of new interventions for dementia-Alzheimer’s symptoms.

2 | CONSOLIDATED RESULTS AND STUDY DESIGN

Enzyme-assisted MALDI-MSI of in situ N-linked glycans has been utilized for the spatial profiling of many different cancer types, revealing unique tumor and stromal spatial differences.61,65,66 Spatial profiling of N-linked glycans in mouse brains has been reported in several studies,94–96 but a spatial definition similar to that seen in cancer specimens cannot be reached. Purified enzymes are often stored in salt solution to preserve activity, which can crystallize during dry-spray application of enzyme on FFPE tissue sections.97,98 Due to the high levels of charged N-linked glycans with fucose and/or sialic acid modifications present in the brain, we hypothesize that the salt crystals from the enzyme storage buffer will interact with the PNGase F cleaved N-linked glycans and reduce signal and spatial definition. To test whether reducing the salt concentration improves signal and spatial definition of brain glycomic analyses of the brain by MALDI-MSI, we performed an overnight dialysis with PNGase F PRIME stored in 0.1X PBS into 0.01X PBS.67,99 After dialysis, the enzyme was aliquoted in either 0.01X, 0.1X, or 0.2X PBS solution and the MALDI-MSI workflow was performed for N-linked glycans using WT mouse brains (Figure 1A). MALDI-MSI analysis using PNGase F in 0.2X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) significantly reduced the total abundance of N-linked glycans detected by mass spectrometry (Figure 1B, S1A–SB). Conversely, MALDI-MSI analysis using PNGase F in 0.01X PBS drastically improved both the total abundance and spatial distribution of N-linked glycans in the WT mouse brain. For example, the complex glycan Hex3dHex1HexNAc4 (m/z 1485 rounded to the nearest 1) showed ubiquitous expression in the mouse brain prepared with PNGase F in 0.2X and 0.1X PBS. However, there was much higher intensity and distinct localization to the cerebellum of the brain treated with PNGase F in 0.01X PBS (Figure 1C). Similarly, the high mannose glycan Hex5HexNAc2 (m/z 1257 rounded to the nearest 1) displayed unique localization to the ventral striatum and surrounding regions when treated with PNGase F in 0.01X PBS (Figure 1C), whereas no distinct spatial information was obtained from brains sprayed with PNGase F suspended in 0.1X and 0.2X PBS. Collectively, our results demonstrate that reduced salt concentration is optimal for the spatial analysis of N-linked glycans in mouse brain samples.

Recently several reports highlight changes in N-linked glycan profiles from the CSF of human patients with AD, suggesting that aberrant N-linked glycan metabolism could be an important aspect of AD pathology.100,101 To further understand changes in N-linked glycans within specific brain regions, we applied the improved enzyme-assisted MALDI-MSI workflow to spatially profile N-linked glycan changes in the 5xFAD and rTg4510 (C57/B6 background) compared to age-matched, C57/B6 WT control mice (Table S1, S3–S4). The 5xFAD mouse model contains five germline mutations linked to familial AD and presents with an Aβ plaque phenotype. The rTg4510 mouse model accumulates hyperphosphorylated tau NFT in the frontal cortex and hippocampus. In this study, we focused on N-linked glycan changes from these two regions, as deterioration in both is strongly associated with behavior deficits and memory loss during the onset of AD-related dementia. We extracted three regions of interest from the mouse frontal cortex and hippocampus that correspond to ≈70 pixels or 70 unique data points from each mouse brain (Figure S2A), averaged these technical replicates to obtain a single mass spectra per animal per brain region, and then performed multivariate analyses to identify major changes between WT mice and the two different AD mouse models (Figure S2A, S3). For the frontal cortex regions, both the clustering heatmap analysis (Figure 2A) and the partial least-squared discriminative analyses (PLS-DA) show distinctive separation between WT and 5xFAD/rTg4510 groups (Figure 2B). However, neither statistical method can distinguish between the 5xFAD and rTg4510 data sets, suggesting that dementia in both animal models share common N-linked glycan phenotypes (Figure 2A–B). N-linked glycan species that are most altered between 5xFAD and rTg4510 mice were highlighted by VIP analysis and ranked by VIP score (Figure 2C). In addition, the volcano plots of both 5xFAD/WT and rTg4510/WT demonstrate that the most significant changes in N-linked glycan abundance are upregulated (Figure 2D). Targeted analysis of the relative abundance of multiple N-linked glycans highlighted by VIP analysis revealed profound increases in the frontal cortex regions of 5xFAD and rTg4510 mice (Figure 3A–D). Glycans 1688, 1743, 1850, and 1339 (all rounded to the nearest 1 m/z) were significantly upregulated in both AD mouse models, and spatial quantification of each was robustly consistent between individual mice (Figure 3A–D).

Next we performed similar analyses on the hippocampus of WT, 5xFAD, and rTg4510 mice (Figure S3–S4, Table S4). Similar to the frontal cortex, we found opposing clustering between WT mice and 5xFAD/rTg4510 mice from both heatmap and PLS-DA analysis (Figure S3A–S3B). VIP analysis and volcano plots both confirmed the hyperglycosylation phenotypes observed in in the frontal cortices (Figure S3C–S3D). In addition, targeted analyses of the relative abundance of N-linked glycans within the hippocampus confirmed the increases of N-glycans within the region (Figure S4A–S4D). Glycans 1419, 1647, 1581, and 2012 (all rounded to the nearest 1 m/z) were significantly upregulated in the hippocampi of both AD mouse model’s and spatial quantification of each was robustly consistent between individual mice (Figure S4A–S4D). Based on the current data set, our sample size provides 84% power to detect 50% of N-linked glycans that have at least a 2.5 standard deviation difference in mean abundance between 5xFAD/rTg4510 and WT. Collectively, increased N-linked glycan species in the two AD mouse models belong to paucimannose, high mannose, and complex classes of glycans, rather than a unique class. These data suggest a fundamental shift in N-glycan expression in both 5xFAD and rTg4510 mouse models.

The profound hyperglycosylation observed in the two AD mouse models raises the interesting question of whether human specimens would display the same phenotype. We obtained three human frontal cortex (middle frontal gyrus, Brodmann area 9) and hippocampal tissue samples with AD diagnosis (Aβ plaque, Thal Aβ stage &gt;3 and tau pathologies, Braak NFT Stage VI) and matched normal, control specimens from the Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center at the University of Kentucky (Table S2). Similar to the animal studies, we extracted three regions of interest from each frontal cortex section corresponding to ≈300 pixels or 300 unique data points from the gray matter of each patient tissue sample (Figure S2B) and averaged these technical replicates to obtain a single mass spectra per sample. We then performed multivariate analyses to identify major changes between normal and AD diagnosis (Table S5–S6). Although human N-linked glycan analysis showed higher variance compared to mouse analyses, both the clustering heatmap analysis (Figure 4A–4B) and the PLS-DA showed separation between the normal and the AD groups. N-linked glycan species that are most altered are generating the most significant changes between cognitively normal controls, and AD specimens were highlighted by VIP analysis, and then ranked by VIP score and volcano plot (Figure 4C–4D). Similar to mouse AD frontal cortex data, all of the significantly altered N-linked glycans in the human AD specimens were increased in the gray matter (Figure 4D–4E). Targeted spatial analysis of the relative abundance of multiple N-linked glycans highlighted by VIP analysis of glycans 1809, 1339, 1501, and 1647 (all rounded to the nearest 1 m/z) highlight profound increases in the frontal cortex, and these changes are predominately localized to the gray matter track of human brain sections (Figure 4E, S5A–S5C).

The hippocampus (particularly) and the frontal cortex are regions often affected in brains with severe AD pathology; we expanded our analysis to three human hippocampal tissue samples with AD diagnosis (Table S2). We extracted three regions of interest from each hippocampal section corresponding to ≈300 pixels or 300 unique data points from each patient specimen (Figure S2C) and averaged these technical replicates to obtain a single mass spectra per tissue slice, and then we performed multivariate analyses to identify major changes between normal and AD diagnosis (Table S6). Both the clustering heatmap analysis and the PLS-DA show separation between the normal and the AD groups (Figure 5A–5B). N-linked glycans that are most altered between age-matched controls and AD specimens were highlighted by VIP analysis and ranked by VIP score and volcano plot (Figure 5C–5D). Strikingly, all the significantly altered N-linked glycans in human AD hippocampal regions were decreased (Figure 5C–5D). Targeted spatial analyses of the relative abundance of multiple N-linked glycans (2174, 2053, 1971, 2377; all rounded to the nearest 1 m/z) highlighted by VIP analysis showed profound decreases, specifically in the hippocampus, throughout the entorhinal cortex CA1, CA2, CA3, or Ammon’s horn (Figure 5E, S6A–S6C). Human N-linked glycans exhibit higher variability compared to mouse models. Based on our sample size analysis, increasing the cohort to seven patients would achieve 80% statistical power for N-linked glycan changes that are currently not statistically significant. We further compared whole-brain N-linked glycan spectral analyses between non-AD humans and mice and found no differences in the number of N-linked glycans identified between the two species (Figure 6A). This implies that N-linked glycosylation pathways are evolutionarily conserved in the brain between mice and humans; therefore, the dysregulation of N-linked glycans suggest opposing metabolism during AD progression, particularly in the hippocampus (Figure 6B). These data support a need for further investigation into the biological origin of mouse and human discrepancies and whether these differences contribute to differential responses to therapy between mouse models of AD and human patients.

Supplementary Material

Supplemental figures

Supplemental table

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Dr. Vander Kooi and Gentry lab members for vigorous discussions regarding the work and Mrs. Dana Napier for performing immunohistochemical-staining on tissue slices at the Markey Cancer Center. This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants R35 NS116824 and P01 NS097197 awarded to Matthew S. Gentry. NIH grant R01 AG066653, St Baldrick’s Career Development Award, V-Scholar Grant, Rally Foundation Independent Investigator Grant awarded to Ramon C. Sun. Lindsey R. Conroy was supported by NIH/NCI training grant T32CA165990. This research was also supported by funding from the University of Kentucky Markey Cancer Center and the NIH-funded Biospecimen Procurement &amp; Translational Pathology Shared Resource Facility of the University of Kentucky Markey Cancer Center P30CA177558.

Funding information

National Institutes of Health, Grant/Award Numbers: R35 NS116824, P01 NS097197, R01 AG066653; University of Kentucky Markey Cancer Center, Grant/Award Number: P30CA177558

APPENDIX

METHODS

Reagents

High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-grade acetonitrile, 200-proof ethanol, HPLC-grade methanol, HPLC-grade water, and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Alphacyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) was obtained from Cayman Chemical. Histological-grade xylenes were obtained from Spectrum Chemical. Citraconic anhydride for antigen retrieval was obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Initial recombinant lyophilized PNGaseF Prime in high PBS was obtained from N-Zyme Scientifics (Cat# PNGase F PRIME-LY, Doylestown, PA, USA). Subsequently, a new PNGase F Prime product was offered with lower phosphate salt content based on communications of the initial results (Cat# PNGase F PRIME-LY Ultra). PNGase F PRIME-LY Ultra is used for the N-linked glycan profiling of mouse and human AD brains using MALDI imaging.

Mouse and human brain specimens

Male, age-matched 5xFAD, rTg4510, and wild-type (WT) mice on the C57/B6 background (12 months old) used in this study were gifts from the Johnson lab, University of Kentucky. Mice were housed in a climate-controlled environment with a 14 (light)/10 (dark) hours cycle (lights on at 0600 hours) with temperature maintained at 72°F (22°C) and humidity maintained at minimum 30%, given water regularly, and fed a solid diet (LabDiet 2018, St. Louis, MO, USA). All mice were provided with tissue material for nesting. Both male and female mouse were housed in the same room, but only male mice were used in this study. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at the University of Kentucky has approved all the animal procedures carried out in this study under PHS Assurance #A3336–01. De-identified human brains specimens and clinical course parameters were provided by the University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center.

Tissue samples and enzyme preparation

Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation followed by immediate brain dissection and fixation in neutral-buffered 10% formalin (NBF), paraffin embedded, and stored at 4°C prior to use. Human samples were obtained from the Sanders-Brown Center on Aging at the University of Kentucky. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks were taken to the University of Kentucky Biospecimen Procurement and Translation Pathology Shared Resource Facility for paraffin embedding and tissue slicing. Tissues were sectioned at 4 μm and mounted on positively charged glass slides for MALDI imaging based on a previously described method.102 Hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) staining of an adjacent brain slice was used for brain regional determination. PNGaseF enzyme was resuspended in deionized (DI) water and dialyzed into varying concentrations of PBS using a Slide-a-lyzer dialysis column (Thermofisher). PBS was changed at 2 and 18 hours; enzyme was collected at 24 hours. Enzyme concentration was compared to the original aliquot using a nanodrop to ensure minimal loss of enzyme through dialysis.

Tissue preparation

FFPE tissue slides were processed and digested with PNGaseF Prime enzyme using a standardized protocol.1 Briefly, tissue slides were heated to 60°C for 1 hour. After cooling, tissue sections were deparaffinized by washing twice in xylenes (3 minutes each). Tissue sections were then rehydrated by submerging the slides twice in 100% ethanol (1 minute each), once in 95% ethanol (1 minute), once in 70% ethanol (1 minute), and twice in DI water (3 minutes each). Following the wash, the slides were transferred to a coplin mailer containing a citraconic anhydride buffer and placed in a water bath steamer for 30 minutes for antigen retrieval. Citraconic anhydride buffer was prepared by adding 25 μL citraconic anhydride in 50 mL HPLC water and adjusted to pH 3 with HCl (≈ 2 μL, 12 M HCl). The buffer was exchanged with HPLC water slowly three times by pouring out 50% of the buffer and replacing with water and waiting 5 minutes between exchanges, prior to replacing completely with HPLC water on the last exchange. The slide was then desiccated for 15 minutes followed by enzymatic digestion.

Slide preparation for matrix-assisted laser desorption and ionization mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-MSI) of N-glycans

Lyophilized PNGase F Prime and dialyzed enzyme was reconstituted in HPLC water (0.1 μg/μL). Using an M5 TMSprayer (HTX Technologies LLC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA), 15 passes of PNGase F Prime at 0.1 mg/mL were sprayed onto slides followed by a 2-hour incubation at 37°C in a prewarmed humidity chamber. After desiccation for 15 minutes, 10 passes of 7 mg/mL CHCA matrix in 50% acetonitrile/0.1% TFA was applied at 0.1 mL/min with a 2.5 mm offset and a velocity of 1300 at 79°C and 10 PSI using the M5 Sprayer. Slides were run immediately on the MALDI or stored in a desiccator until analysis.

MALDI-MSI analysis

For the detection and separation of N-glycans, a Waters SynaptG2-Xs high-definition mass spectrometer equipped with traveling wave ion mobility was used. The laser was operating at 1000 Hz with an energy of 200 AU and spot size of 50 μm at X and Y coordinates of 100 μm with mass range set at 500 to 3500 m/z. Data acquisition spectrums were uploaded to High Definition Imaging (HDI) Software (Waters Corporation) for the generation of N-glycan images.102 Regions of interest (ROIs) were defined by the structural components of the brain determined by an adjacent H&amp;E slide. H&amp;E slides were scanned and exported using the HALO digital pathology software. For all pixels defined within an ROI, peak intensities were averaged and normalized by total ion current. Representative glycan structures were made using GlycoWorkbench.103

Quantification and statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were carried out by GraphPad Prism version 8.0. Grouped analysis was performed using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Dunnett’s multiple comparisons post hoc test. Column analysis was performed using an unpaired, two-tailed t-test. A P-value &lt; .05 was considered statistically significant. The statistical parameters for each experiment can be found in the figures and figure legends. Three technical replicates for each tissue were averaged, and three biological replicates per group were quantified. Sample size calculation was performed using the bioinformatic pipeline established by Liu et al. that controls for false discovery rate in high-dimensional data sets using the ssize.fdr package in R.104 Data were uploaded into MetaboAnalyst version 5.0 for univariate volcano plot analysis, chemometric partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), variable importance in projection (VIP) analysis, and clustering heat map analysis. Data were uploaded as a.csv file and autoscaled (mean-centered and divided by the standard deviation of each variable). Volcano plots had a fold-change threshold of 1.0, and P-value threshold of 0.1. Heat maps were organized using the top features ranked by PLS-DA VIP and distance measured by a Euclidean analysis.

FIGURE 1 MALDI-MSI workflow and improved resolution with decreased buffer salt concentrations. (A) Enzyme-assisted MALDI-MSI workflow for the spatial profiling of N-linked glycans in brain sections. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) mouse brains were sectioned into 4 μm slices and mounted onto charged microscope slides. Representative histology is shown by an adjacent H&amp;E-stained section. Following antigen retrieval, PNGase F and CHCA matrix were dry sprayed on the tissue slices and directly analyzed by MALDI-MSI. 0.01x, 0.1x, and 0.2x PBS concentrations were tested as the buffer for PNGase F during dry spray. (B) Magnified ion spectra showing the relative abundance Hex5dHex1HexNAc4 (m/z: 1485 rounded to the nearest one) when prepared with 0.01x, 0.1x, and 0.2x PBS. Bolded values on spectra represent m/z (top) and relative abundance (bottom). (C) Spatial distribution of two representative N-linked glycans from adjacent brain sections prepared with 0.01x, 0.1x, and 0.2x PBS. Glycan structures and m/z values (rounded to the nearest 1) are displayed to the right of the brain heatmaps. Blue square: N-acetylglucosamine, green circle: mannose, and red triangle: fucose. Heatmap gradient and scale bar are displayed below images

FIGURE 2 Mouse Alzheimer’s disease (AD) frontal cortices are hyperglycosylated. (A) Two-dimensional clustering heatmap analysis of WT, 5xFAD, and rTg4510 (Tau) mouse models. The top 25 most changed (by one-way ANOVA) N-linked glycans are shown. Three technical replicates extracted from regions of interest (ROIs) in the frontal cortex of each mouse were collected, averaged, and are represented as each biological replicate. (B) Partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of WT (red) 5xFAD (green) and rTg4510 (tau, blue) mouse models. The 95% confidence interval for each group are shown as shaded areas using the same color as respective groups. (C) Variable importance in projection (VIP) analysis displaying the top 15 N-linked glycans that contributes to PLS-DA clustering in (B). (D) Volcano plot of the fold change between either 5xFAD/WT (top) or rTg4510 (tau)/WT (bottom). N-glycans shown with either 1.5-fold increase or decrease in p-value (log10 ) &gt;0.1 are highlighted in pink

FIGURE 3 Mouse Alzheimer’s disease (AD) frontal cortices have increased N-linked glycans in multiple regions. (A) Left: The relative abundance of Hex3dHex1HexNAc5 m/z: 1688. Middle: Graphical representation of glycan structure. Right: Spatial distribution of Hex3dHex1HexNAc5 in each biological replicate of WT, 5xFAD, and rTg4510 (Tau) mouse brains. (B) Left: The relative abundance of Hex8HexNAc2 m/z: 1743. Middle: Graphical representation of glycan structure. Right: Spatial distribution of Hex8HexNAc2 in each biological replicate of WT, 5xFAD, and Tau mouse brains. (C) Left: The relative abundance of Hex4dHex1HexNAc5 m/z: 1850. Middle: Graphical representation of glycan structure. Right: Spatial distribution of Hex4dHex1HexNAc5 in each biological replicate of WT, 5xFAD, and Tau mouse brains. (D) Left: The relative abundance of Hex3HexNAc4 m/z: 1339. Middle: Graphical representation of glycan structure. Right: Spatial distribution of Hex3HexNAc4 in each biological replicate of WT, 5xFAD, and Tau mouse brains. Blue square: N-acetylglucosamine, green circle: mannose, yellow circle: galactose, and red triangle: fucose. Heatmap gradient and scale bar are displayed below images. Data shown represent the mean ± the standard error of the mean (SEM) of n = 3 per mouse model. ****P &lt; .0001; *** .0001 &lt; P &lt; .001; one-way ANOVA

FIGURE 4 Human Alzheimer’s disease (AD) frontal cortex tissue samples are hyperglycosylated in the gray matter. (A) Two-dimensional clustering heatmap analysis of N-linked glycans between normal and AD frontal cortical sections. Top 15 most changed (by ANOVA) N-linked glycans are shown. Three technical replicates extracted from regions of interest (ROI) in the gray matter regions were collected and averaged and represented as each biological replicate. (B) Partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of N-linked glycans between normal (red) and AD (green) frontal cortical sections; 95% confidence interval for each group are shown as shaded areas using the same color as respective groups. (C) Variable importance in projection (VIP) analysis showing top 15 N-linked glycans contribute to PLS-DA clustering in (B). (D) Volcano plot showing fold change between AD/WT. N-linked glycans shown with either 1.5-fold increase or decrease with p-value (log10) &gt;0.1 are highlighted in pink. (E) Left: The relative abundance of Hex5dHex1HexNAc4 m/z: 1809. Middle: Graphical representation of glycan structure. Right: Spatial distribution of Hex5dHex1HexNAc4 in a pair of representative brain sections from normal and AD frontal cortices. Blue square: N-acetylglucosamine, green circle: mannose, yellow circle: galactose, and red triangle: fucose. Heatmap gradient and scale bar are displayed below images. Data shown represents the mean ± the SEM of n = 3 per group. * P &lt; .05; unpaired, two-tailed t test

FIGURE 5 Human Alzheimer’s disease (AD) hippocampal tissue showing heterogeneous hypoglycosylation. (A) Two-dimensional clustering heatmap analysis of N-linked glycans between normal and AD hippocampal regions. Top 25 most changed (by ANOVA) N-linked glycans are shown. Three technical replicates extracted from regions of interest (ROIs) in the hippocampus were collected, averaged, and represented as each biological replicate. (B) Partial least-squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of N-linked glycans between normal (red) and AD (green) hippocampi; 95% confidence interval for each group are shown as shaded areas using the same color as respective groups. (C) Variable importance in projection (VIP) analysis showing the top 15 N-linked glycans contribute to PLS-DA clustering in (B). (D) Volcano plot showing fold change between AD/WT. N-linked glycans shown with either 1.0-fold increase or decrease with p-value (log10) &gt;0.1 are highlighted in pink. (E) Left: The relative abundance of Hex6dHex1HexNAc5 m/z: 2174. Middle: Graphical representation of glycan structure. Right: Spatial distribution of Hex6dHex1HexNAc5 in a pair of representative brain sections from normal and AD hippocampi. Blue square: N-acetylglucosamine, green circle: mannose, yellow circle: galactose, and red triangle: fucose. Heatmap gradient and scale bar are displayed below images. Data shown represent the mean ± the SEM of n = 3 per group. * P &lt; .05; unpaired, two-tailed t test

FIGURE 6 Mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and AD human brain regions do not share the same glycosylation trends. (A) Total ion current of the entire human frontal cortex section (top) or whole mouse brain (bottom) represent the total number of N-glycans collected. The m/z values are represented as % of the largest peak within each spectrum (m/z: 1257, rounded to the nearest 1). Blue square: N-acetylglucosamine, green circle: mannose, yellow circle: galactose, red triangle: fucose, and purple diamond: sialic acid. (B) Graphical representation of the similarities and differences in N-linked glycan changes of AD between mouse and human frontal cortices and hippocampi

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT

1. Systematic Review:

The authors reviewed the literature using traditional (eg., PubMed and Google Scholar) sources and meeting abstracts and presentations. Although detailed and spatial changes in N-linked glycosylation have not been defined in human Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brains, several publications have described the roles of N-linked glycan in synaptic transmission. These relevant citations are cited appropriately.

2. Interpretation:

Our findings led to an integrated hypothesis that aberrant glycosylation is an etiological hallmark of both mouse and human AD brains.

3. Future Directions:

This report proposes a framework for the generation of new hypotheses and the conduct of additional studies. Examples include further understanding of (a) the metabolic flux between central carbon metabolism and N-linked glycan biosynthesis in unique brain cell populations during AD; (b) identification of proteins with perturbed N-linked glycosylation; and (c) the potential reversibility of hyperglycosylation events for neuronal function and improving AD symptoms in the clinical setting.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Ramon C. Sun has research support and has received a consultancy fee from Maze Therapeutics. Derek B. Allison received a book royalty from Wolters Kluwer. Matthew S. Gentry has received research support and research compounds from Maze Therapeutics, Valerion Therapeutics, and Ionis Pharmaceuticals. Matthew S. Gentry also received a consultancy fee from Maze Therapeutics, PTC Therapeutics, and the Glut1-Deficiency Syndrome Foundation. Tara R. Hawkinson, Lyndsay E. A. Yong, Kia H. Markussen, Lindsey R. Conroy, Kayla M. Kerch, Lance A. Johnson, Peter T. Nelson, Chi Wang, and Harrison A. Clarke report no disclosures.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Additional supporting information may be found in the online version of the article at the publisher’s website.


REFERENCES

1. Brookmeyer R , Gray S , Kawas C . Projections of Alzheimer’s disease in the United States and the public health impact of delaying disease onset. Am J Public Health. 1998;88 :1337–1342.9736873
2. Narayan KM , Boyle JP , Geiss LS , Saaddine JB , Thompson TJ . Impact of recent increase in incidence on future diabetes burden: U.S., 2005–2050. Diabetes Care. 2006;29 :2114–2116.16936162
3. Lane CA , Hardy J , Schott JM . Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Neurol. 2018;25 :59–70.28872215
4. Selkoe DJ . The molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 1991;6 :487–498.1673054
5. Mosconi L , Pupi A , De Leon MJ . Brain glucose hypometabolism and oxidative stress in preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1147 :180.19076441
6. Saunders AM , Strittmatter WJ , Schmechel D , Association of apolipoprotein E allele ϵ4 with late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 1993;43 :1467.8350998
7. Hur J-Y , Frost GR , Wu X , The innate immunity protein IFITM3 modulates γ-secretase in Alzheimer’s disease. Nature. 2020;586 :735–740.32879487
8. Akiyama H , Barger S , Barnum S , Inflammation and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2000;21 :383–421.10858586
9. Horn D , Ruppin E , Usher M , Herrmann M . Neural network modeling of memory deterioration in Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Comput. 1993;5 :736–749.
10. Fox NC , Freeborough PA , Rossor MN . Visualisation and quantification of rates of atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease. Lancet North Am Ed. 1996;348 :94–97.
11. Lull ME , Block ML . Microglial activation and chronic neurodegeneration. Neurotherapeutics. 2010;7 :354–365.20880500
12. Mergenthaler P , Lindauer U , Dienel GA , Meisel A . Sugar for the brain: the role of glucose in physiological and pathological brain function. Trends Neurosci. 2013;36 :587–597.23968694
13. Gallagher CH , Judah JD , Rees KR . Glucose oxidation by brain mitochondria. Biochem J. 1956;62 :436–440.13303993
14. Hertz L , Dienel GA . Energy metabolism in the brain. In: Dwyer DS , ed. International Review of Neurobiology. Academic Press; 2002:IN1–IN4.
15. Vannucci RC , Vannucci SJ . Glucose metabolism in the developing brain. Semin Perinatol. 2000;24 :107–115.10805166
16. Cunnane S , Nugent S , Roy M , Brain fuel metabolism, aging, and Alzheimer’s disease. Nutrition. 2011;27 :3–20.21035308
17. Schurr A , West CA . Rigor BM. Lactate-supported synaptic function in the rat hippocampal slice preparation. Science. 1988;240 :1326–1328.3375817
18. Magistretti PJ , Pellerin L . Astrocytes couple synaptic activity to glucose utilization in the brain. Physiology. 1999;14 :177–182.
19. Rangaraju V , Calloway N , Ryan TA . Activity-driven local ATP synthesis is required for synaptic function. Cell. 2014;156 :825–835.24529383
20. Herculano-Houzel S The glia/neuron ratio: how it varies uniformly across brain structures and species and what that means for brain physiology and evolution. Glia. 2014;62 :1377–1391.24807023
21. Lundgaard I , Li B , Xie L , Direct neuronal glucose uptake heralds activity-dependent increases in cerebral metabolism. Nat Commun. 2015;6 :1–12.
22. Dienel GA . Brain glucose metabolism: integration of energetics with function. Physiol Rev. 2019;99 :949–1045.30565508
23. Yu Y , Herman P , Rothman DL , Agarwal D , Hyder F . Evaluating the gray and white matter energy budgets of human brain function. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2018;38 :1339–1353.28589753
24. Sokoloff L , Reivich M , Kennedy C , The [14C] deoxyglucose method for the measurement of local cerebral glucose utilization: theory, procedure, and normal values in the conscious and anesthetized albino rat 1. J Neurochem. 1977;28 :897–916.864466
25. Small GW , Ercoli LM , Silverman DH , Cerebral metabolic and cognitive decline in persons at genetic risk for Alzheimer’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97 :6037–6042.10811879
26. Blass JP . Alzheimer’s disease and Alzheimer’s dementia: distinct but overlapping entities. Neurobiol Aging. 2002;23 :1077–1084.12470805
27. Grady CL , Haxby JV , Schlageter NL , Berg G , Rapoport SI . Stability of metabolic and neuropsychological asymmetries in dementia of the Alzheimer type. Neurology. 1986;36 :1390–1392.3762951
28. Haxby JV , Grady CL , Koss E , Longitudinal study of cerebral metabolic asymmetries and associated neuropsychological patterns in early dementia of the Alzheimer type. Arch Neurol. 1990;47 :753–760.2357155
29. Johnson EC , Dammer EB , Duong DM , Large-scale proteomic analysis of Alzheimer’s disease brain and cerebrospinal fluid reveals early changes in energy metabolism associated with microglia and astrocyte activation. Nat Med. 2020;26 :769–780.32284590
30. Williams HC , Piron MA , Nation GK , Oral gavage delivery of stable isotope tracer for in vivo metabolomics. Metabolites. 2020;10 :501.
31. Williams HC , Farmer BC , Piron MA , APOE alters glucose flux through central carbon pathways in astrocytes. Neurobiol Dis. 2020;136 :104742.31931141
32. Mosconi L Brain glucose metabolism in the early and specific diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2005;32 :486–510.15747152
33. Ibáñez V , Pietrini P , Alexander GE , Regional glucose metabolic abnormalities are not the result of atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology. 1998;50 :1585–1593.9633698
34. Duran J , Hervera A , Markussen KH , Astrocytic glycogen accumulation drives the pathophysiology of neurodegeneration in Lafora disease. Brain. 2021;144 (8 ):2349–2360.33822008
35. Brewer MK , Putaux J-L , Rondon A , Uittenbogaard A , Sullivan MA , Gentry MS . Polyglucosan body structure in Lafora disease. Carbohydr Polym. 2020;240 :116260.32475552
36. Scott H , Panin VM . The role of protein N-glycosylation in neural transmission. Glycobiology. 2014;24 :407–417.24643084
37. Schwarz F , Aebi M . Mechanisms and principles of N-linked protein glycosylation. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2011;21 :576–582.21978957
38. Imperiali B , O’Connor SE . Effect of N-linked glycosylation on glycopeptide and glycoprotein structure. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 1999;3 :643–649.10600722
39. Stanley P , Taniguchi N , Aebi M . N-glycans. Essentials of Glycobiolog. 3rd edn. N-glycans; 2017.
40. Lodish H , Berk A , Zipursky SL , Matsudaira P , Baltimore D , Darnell J . Protein glycosylation in the ER and Golgi complex. Molecular Cell Biology. 4th ed. WH Freeman; 2000.
41. Murrey HE , Gama CI , Kalovidouris SA , Protein fucosylation regulates synapsin Ia/Ib expression and neuronal morphology in primary hippocampal neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2006;103 :21–26.16373512
42. Chen J , Su Z , Zhang C , Normal development and fertility of Fut1, Fut2, and Sec1 triple knockout mice. bioRxiv. 2019:615070 .
43. Kalovidouris SA , Gama CI , Lee LW , Hsieh-Wilson LC . A role for fucose α (1− 2) galactose carbohydrates in neuronal growth. J Am Chem Soc. 2005;127 :1340–1341.15686343
44. Schmidt J , Catterall W . Palmitylation, sulfation, and glycosylation of the alpha subunit of the sodium channel. Role of post-translational modifications in channel assembly. J Biol Chem. 1987;262 :13713–13723.2443496
45. Cartwright TA , Schwalbe RA . Atypical sialylated N-glycan structures are attached to neuronal voltage-gated potassium channels. Biosci Rep. 2009;29 :301–313.18937645
46. Baycin-Hizal D , Gottschalk A , Jacobson E , Physiologic and pathophysiologic consequences of altered sialylation and glycosylation on ion channel function. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014;453 :243–253.24971539
47. Lazniewska J , Weiss N . Glycosylation of voltage-gated calcium channels in health and disease. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2017;1859 :662–668.
48. Benson DL , Schnapp LM , Shapiro L , Huntley GW . Making memories stick: cell-adhesion molecules in synaptic plasticity. Trends Cell Biol. 2000;10 :473–482.11050419
49. Kleene R , Schachner M . Glycans and neural cell interactions. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5 :195–208.14976519
50. Wasser CR , Masiulis I , Durakoglugil MS , Differential splicing and glycosylation of Apoer2 alters synaptic plasticity and fear learning. Sci Signal. 2014;7 :ra113–ra.25429077
51. Inaba H , Kai D , Kida S . N-glycosylation in the hippocampus is required for the consolidation and reconsolidation of contextual fear memory. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2016;135 :57–65.27343988
52. Matthies H Jr , Kretlow J , Matthies H , Smalla K-H , Staak S , Krug M . Glycosylation of proteins during a critical time window is necessary for the maintenance of long-term potentiation in the hippocampal CA1 region. Neuroscience. 1999;91 :175–183.10336068
53. Freeze HH , Chong JX , Bamshad MJ , Ng BG . Solving glycosylation disorders: fundamental approaches reveal complicated pathways. Am J Hum Genet. 2014;94 :161–175.24507773
54. Narimatsu Y , Joshi HJ , Nason R , An atlas of human glycosylation pathways enables display of the human glycome by gene engineered cells. Mol Cell. 2019;75 :394–407. e5.31227230
55. Marquardt T , Denecke J . Congenital disorders of glycosylation: review of their molecular bases, clinical presentations and specific therapies. Eur J Pediatr. 2003;162 :359–379.12756558
56. Chen Z , Yu Q , Yu Q , In-depth site-specific analysis of N-glycoproteome in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and glycosylation landscape changes in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Mol Cell Proteomics. 2017;20 :100081.
57. Franck J , Arafah K , Elayed M , MALDI imaging mass spectrometry: state of the art technology in clinical proteomics. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2009;8 :2023–2033.19451175
58. Cornett DS , Frappier SL , Caprioli RM . MALDI-FTICR imaging mass spectrometry of drugs and metabolites in tissue. Anal Chem. 2008;80 :5648–5653.18564854
59. Goto-Inoue N , Hayasaka T , Zaima N , Setou M . Imaging mass spectrometry for lipidomics. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011;1811 :961–969.21440085
60. West CA , Wang M , Herrera H , N-linked glycan branching and fucosylation are increased directly in Hcc tissue as determined through in situ glycan imaging. J Proteome Res. 2018;17 :3454–3462.30110170
61. Drake RR , West CA , Mehta AS , Angel PM . Maldi mass spectrometry imaging of n-linked glycans in tissues. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1104 :59–76.30484244
62. Drake RR , Powers TW , Jones EE , Bruner E , Mehta AS , Angel PM . MALDI mass spectrometry imaging of N-linked glycans in cancer tissues. Adv Cancer Res. 2017;134 :85–116.28110657
63. Powers TW , Neely BA , Shao Y , MALDI imaging mass spectrometry profiling of N-glycans in formalin-fixed paraffin embedded clinical tissue blocks and tissue microarrays. PLoS One. 2014;9 : e106255.25184632
64. Stanback AE , Conroy LR , Young LEA , Regional N-Glycan and lipid analysis from tissues using MALDI-mass spectrometry imaging. Star Protoc. 2021;2 :100304.33554139
65. Angel PM , Mehta A , Norris-Caneda K , Drake RR . Maldi imaging mass spectrometry of n-glycans and tryptic peptides from the same formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue section. Tissue Proteomics. 2017;1788 :225–241.
66. Conroy LR , Young LE , Stanback AE , Mass spectrometry imaging of N-Glycans reveals racial discrepancies in low grade prostate tumors. bioRxiv. 2020.
67. Powers TW , Jones EE , Betesh LR , Matrix assisted laser desorption ionization imaging mass spectrometry workflow for spatial profiling analysis of N-linked glycan expression in tissues. Anal Chem. 2013;85 :9799–9806.24050758
68. Zamze S , Harvey DJ , Chen YJ , Guile GR , Dwek RA , Wing DR . Sialylated N-glycans in adult rat brain tissue: a widespread distribution of disialylated antennae in complex and hybrid structures. Eur J Biochem. 1998;258 :243–270.9851715
69. Samal J , Saldova R , Rudd PM , Pandit A , O’Flaherty R . Region-specific characterization of N-Glycans in the striatum and substantia nigra of an adult rodent brain. Anal Chem. 2020;92 :12842–12851.32815717
70. Hodge RD , Bakken TE , Miller JA , Conserved cell types with divergent features in human versus mouse cortex. Nature. 2019;573 :61–68.31435019
71. Scearce-Levie K , Sanchez PE , Lewcock JW . Leveraging preclinical models for the development of Alzheimer disease therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2020;19 :447–462.32612262
72. Miller JA , Horvath S , Geschwind DH . Divergence of human and mouse brain transcriptome highlights Alzheimer disease pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2010;107 :12698–12703.20616000
73. Wellen KE , Lu C , Mancuso A , The hexosamine biosynthetic pathway couples growth factor-induced glutamine uptake to glucose metabolism. Genes Dev. 2010;24 :2784–2799.21106670
74. Marshall S , Bacote V , Traxinger R . Discovery of a metabolic pathway mediating glucose-induced desensitization of the glucose transport system. Role of hexosamine biosynthesis in the induction of insulin resistance. J Biol Chem. 1991;266 :4706–4712.2002019
75. Kim J , Lee HM , Cai F , The hexosamine biosynthesis pathway is a targetable liability in KRAS/LKB1 mutant lung cancer. Nat Metab. 2020;2 (12 ):1401–1412.33257855
76. Sun RC , Fan TWM , Deng P , Noninvasive liquid diet delivery of stable isotopes into mouse models for deep metabolic network tracing. Nat Commun. 2017;8 :1646.29158483
77. Lehle L , Tanner W . The specific site of tunicamycin inhibition in the formation of dolichol-bound N-acetylglucosamine derivatives. FEBS Lett. 1976;71 :167–170.
78. Dewal MB , DiChiara AS , Antonopoulos A , XBP1s links the unfolded protein response to the molecular architecture of mature N-glycans. Chem Biol. 2015;22 :1301–1312.26496683
79. Wainger BJ , Kiskinis E , Mellin C , Intrinsic membrane hyperexcitability of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient-derived motor neurons. Cell Rep. 2014;7 :1–11.24703839
80. Katayama T , Imaizumi K , Manabe T , Hitomi J , Kudo T , Tohyama M . Induction of neuronal death by ER stress in Alzheimer’s disease. J Chem Neuroanat. 2004;28 :67–78.15363492
81. de L’Etang AF , Maharjan N , Braña MC , Marinesco-Sjögren syndrome protein SIL1 regulates motor neuron subtype-selective ER stress in ALS. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18 :227.25559081
82. Chen Z , Guo H , Lu Z , Sun K , Jin Q . Hyperglycemia aggravates spinal cord injury through endoplasmic reticulum stress mediated neuronal apoptosis, gliosis and activation. Biomed Pharmacother. 2019;112 :108672.30784940
83. Alberdi E , Wyssenbach A , Alberdi M , Ca2+-dependent endoplasmic reticulum stress correlates with astrogliosis in oligomeric amyloid β-treated astrocytes and in a model of A lzheimer’s disease. Aging Cell. 2013;12 :292–302.23409977
84. Kyuhou S-i , Kato N , Gemba H . Emergence of endoplasmic reticulum stress and activated microglia in Purkinje cell degeneration mice. Neurosci Lett. 2006;396 :91–96.16356646
85. Hamos JE , DeGennaro LJ , Drachman DA . Synaptic loss in Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. Neurology. 1989;39 :355.2927643
86. Feany MB , Lee S , Edwards RH , Buckley KM . The synaptic vesicle protein SV2 is a novel type of transmembrane transporter. Cell. 1992;70 :861–867.1355409
87. Han W , Rhee J-S , Maximov A , N-glycosylation is essential for vesicular targeting of synaptotagmin 1. Neuron. 2004;41 :85–99.14715137
88. Khachaturian Z Calcium hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease and brain aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1994;747 :1–11.7847664
89. Landfield PW , Pitler TA . Prolonged Ca2+-dependent afterhyperpolarizations in hippocampal neurons of aged rats. Science. 1984;226 :1089–1092.6494926
90. Thibault O , Gant JC , Landfield PW . Expansion of the calcium hypothesis of brain aging and Alzheimer’s disease: minding the store. Aging Cell. 2007;6 :307–317.17465978
91. Hachinski V , Einhäupl K , Ganten D , Preventing dementia by preventing stroke: the Berlin Manifesto. Alzheimer’s Dement. 2019;15 :961–984.31327392
92. Jicha GA , Nelson PT . Hippocampal sclerosis, argyrophilic grain disease, and primary age-related tauopathy. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2019;25 :208.30707194
93. Lee J , Ha S , Kim M , Spatial and temporal diversity of glycome expression in mammalian brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2020;117 :28743–28753.33139572
94. Guan M , Zhang Z , Li S , Silver nanoparticles as matrix for MALDI FTICR MS profiling and imaging of diverse lipids in brain. Talanta. 2018;179 :624–631.29310285
95. Li S , Zhang Y , Liu J , Electrospray deposition device used to precisely control the matrix crystal to improve the performance of MALDI MSI. Sci Rep. 2016;6 :1–10.28442746
96. Toghi Eshghi S , Yang S , Wang X , Shah P , Li X , Zhang H . Imaging of N-linked glycans from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections using MALDI mass spectrometry. ACS Chem Biol. 2014;9 :2149–2156.25029481
97. Stanback AE , Conroy LR , Young LE , Regional N-glycan and lipid analysis from tissues using MALDI-mass spectrometry imaging. STAR Protocols. 2021;2 :100304.33554139
98. Andres DA , Young LE , Gentry MS , Sun RC . Spatial profiling of gangliosides in mouse brain by mass spectrometry imaging. J Lipid Res. 2020;61 :1537.32482716
99. Drake RR , Powers TW , Norris-Caneda K , Mehta AS , Angel PM . In situ imaging of N-glycans by MALDI imaging mass spectrometry of fresh or formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. Curr Protoc Protein Sci. 2018;94 :e68.30074304
100. Palmigiano A , Barone R , Sturiale L , CSF N-glycoproteomics for early diagnosis in Alzheimer’s disease. J Proteomics. 2016;131 :29–37.26455811
101. Cho BG , Veillon L , Mechref Y . N-Glycan profile of cerebrospinal fluids from Alzheimer’s disease patients using liquid chromatography with mass spectrometry. J Proteome Res. 2019;18 :3770–3779.31437391
102. Stanback AE , Conroy LR , Young LE , Regional N-glycan and lipid analysis from tissues using MALDI-mass spectrometry imaging. STAR Protocols. 2021;2 :100304.33554139
103. Ceroni A , Maass K , Geyer H , Geyer R , Dell A , Haslam SM . GlycoWorkbench: a tool for the computer-assisted annotation of mass spectra of glycans. J Proteome Res. 2008;7 :1650–1659.18311910
104. Liu P , Hwang JG . Quick calculation for sample size while controlling false discovery rate with application to microarray analysis. Bioinformatics. 2007;23 :739–746.17237060
