LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101256586
33820
J Neuroimmune Pharmacol
J Neuroimmune Pharmacol
Journal of neuroimmune pharmacology : the official journal of the Society on NeuroImmune Pharmacology
1557-1890
1557-1904

34296391
9386897
10.1007/s11481-021-10002-x
NIHMS1816684
Article
Suppression of HIV-associated Macrophage Activation by a p75 Neurotrophin Receptor Ligand
Killebrew Deirdre A. 13
Williams Kimberly S. 124
Xie Youmei 1
Longo Frank 5
Meeker Rick B. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7487-5315
12
1 Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
2 Neurobiology Curriculum, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA
3 DNA Sciences Inc, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
4 Department of Environmental and Health Sciences, Spelman College, Atlanta, GA 30314, USA
5 Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Authors’ Contributions Preparation of materials, study design, array analysis, data summaries and editing of the manuscript were done by Deirdre A. Killebrew and Kimberly S. Williams who contributed equally to the studies. Youmei Xie provided the western blot data. Frank Longo provided an unrestricted gift of LM11A-31, consulted on the use of the compound, and reviewed the manuscript. Rick B Meeker participated in the design of experiments, wrote the first draft of the manuscript, provided funding for the studies, reviewed the data and participated in the analysis of the data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

✉ Rick B. Meeker, meekerr@neurology.unc.edu
1 8 2022
6 2022
22 7 2021
12 12 2022
17 1-2 242260
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Previous studies indicated that nerve growth factor (NGF) and proNGF differentially regulate the phenotype of macrophages and microglia via actions at tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA) and p75 neurotrophin receptors (p75NTR), respectively. The ability of HIV gp120 and virions to induce the secretion of factors toxic to neurons was suppressed by NGF and enhanced by proNGF, suggesting the potential for neurotrophin based “anti-inflammatory” interventions. To investigate the “anti-inflammatory” potential of the p75NTR ligand, LM11A-31, we treated cultured macrophages and microglia with HIV gp120 in the presence or absence of the ligand and evaluated the morphological phenotype, intrinsic calcium signaling, neurotoxic activity and proteins in the secretome. LM11A-31 at 10 nM was able to suppress the release of neurotoxic factors from both monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) and microglia. The protective effects correlated with a shift in morphology and a unique secretory phenotype rich in growth factors that overrode the actions of HIV gp120. The protein pattern was generally consistent with anti-inflammatory, phagocytic and tissue remodeling functions. Although the toxic factor(s) and the source of the neuroprotection were not identified, the data indicated that an increased degradation of NGF induced by HIV gp120 was likely to contribute to neuronal vulnerability. Although substantial work is still needed to reveal the functions of many proteins in the mononuclear phagocyte secretome, such as growth and differentiation factors, the data clearly indicate that the ligand LM11A-31 has excellent therapeutic potential due to its ability to induce a more protective phenotype that restricts activation by HIV.

Inflammation
Microglia
Growth factor
Neuroprotection
HIV
Secretome

pmcIntroduction

Inflammatory activation of macrophages and microglia in response to CNS injury and disease is widely believed to have a significant negative impact on neuron function. The deleterious effects of these cells have been explored extensively in the context of HIV infection and have been linked in part to the release of soluble factors that injure neurons (Giulian et al. 1990; Pulliam et al. 1991; Bragg et al. 2002; Kolson 2002; Meeker et al. 2012, 2016). While a variety of cytokines, chemokines, neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, free radicals and proteolytic enzymes have been suggested as potential neurotoxic factors, the mechanisms of neural damage are still incompletely understood. Efforts to prevent neural damage have focused on ways to reduce or block the actions of these various modulators. However, these efforts are hindered by a poor understanding of the regulation of macrophage activation and the complexity of the macrophage secretome. Macrophages and microglia are phenotypically dynamic cells that can secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines, anti-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, proteolytic enzymes and/or growth factors depending on their external cues (Streit 2005). The functional effects of the various factors range from cell killing to neuroprotection. These different activities may be present at the same time and may shift over time. Strategies to effectively control inflammation need to take such factors into consideration. Given the significant beneficial functions of these cells, it is not surprising that efforts to reduce neural damage with anti-inflammatory drugs that globally suppress activity have had little success. Effective therapeutic modulation of these cells will require interventions capable of shifting the balance of activity in ways that decrease damage while at the same time taking advantage of the macrophage’s natural ability to protect and repair tissues.

Previous studies of cultured human monocyte-derived macrophages (hMDM) have shown that hMDM robustly express the neurotrophin receptors tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA) and p75 (p75NTR) and respond differently to their respective ligands, mature nerve growth factor (NGF) and its precursor, proNGF (Williams et al. 2015). NGF was shown to induce a morphological and a functional secretory phenotype that was less toxic to neurons whereas, proNGF induced a secretory phenotype that enhanced damage to neurons. This dichotomy in the actions of NGF versus proNGF parallels data indicating that a shift in the neurotrophin balance to higher proNGF:NGF ratios predisposes neurons to degeneration during aging and Alzheimer’s disease (Fahnestock et al. 2001; Peng et al. 2004; Al-Shawi et al. 2008; Zeng et al. 2011; Mufson et al. 2019). The potential contributions of altered neurotrophin signaling to neurodegenerative disease are well recognized and supported by studies showing that neurotrophin receptor ligands are protective in various rodent models of neuropathogenesis(Mocchetti and Bachis 2004; Longo et al. 2007; Mocchetti et al. 2007; Yang et al. 2008; Shi et al. 2013; Tep et al. 2013; Nguyen et al. 2014; Simmons et al. 2016). In these studies, the protective effects were largely attributed to actions on neurons although a significant suppression of microglial activity was also seen (Nguyen et al. 2014).

The p75 neurotrophin receptor ligand, LM11A-31, was developed as a small molecule neurotrophin mimetic and has been shown to have neuroprotective effects in a variety of in vitro and in vivo disease models (Yang et al. 2008; Knowles et al. 2013; Longo and Massa 2013; Shi et al. 2013; Tep et al. 2013; Nguyen et al. 2014) including HIV-associated neural damage (Meeker et al. 2012, 2016). The robust expression of p75NTR on monocytes and macrophages suggested that these cells are likely to be prominent targets for LM11A-31 and these interactions may potentially add to the therapeutic benefit. In the current study we evaluated the effects of LM11A-31 on macrophage secretory phenotype in the presence and absence of an inflammatory stimulus. The ligand reduced the secretion of neurotoxic factors by inducing an “anti-inflammatory” phenotype with unique effects on macrophage morphology and secretome that overshadowed the effects of HIV.

Materials and Methods

Isolation and Culture of Human Monocyte-derived Macrophages

De-identified human buffy coat leukocytes were purchased and shipped within 24 h after blood draw from healthy donors at the New York Blood Center (http://nybloodcenter.org/), a non-profit organization specifically for the collection and distribution of blood for clinical and research purposes. The proposed research was screened and approved by the New York Blood Center prior to initiation of the studies. Blood was diluted 1:1 with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) centrifuged at 500 X g for 20 min over Ficoll-Paque (GE Healthcare 17–1440-03) and the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from the interface and placed in a tube containing 20 mls PBS and brought to a final volume of 40 mls. PBMCs were centrifuged at 100 × g for 20 min. The supernatant was removed and the soft pellet was reconstituted in 10 mls of red blood cell lysis buffer and incubated for 10 min at RT to remove any red blood cell contamination. The cells were then diluted to 40 mls with PBS and centrifuged for 20 min at 80 × g to give a soft pellet. The wash procedure was repeated, and the final washed cell pellet was re-suspended in 20 mls Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM) with high glucose, 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco 160,000–044) and 20 μg/ml gentamicin (Gibco 15,750–60). Cells were seeded into ultralow adhesion 6 well plates (Corning 3471) at a density of 107 cells/well. PBMCs were cultured for 5–7 days to allow monocyte attachment. The remaining white blood cells were washed, from the plate yielding a pure monocyte/macrophage culture. The adherent cells were differentiated into monocyte-derived macrophages using human GM-CSF (15 ng/ml) in complete DMEM for 5 days. A previous comparison of GM-CSF with M-CSF indicated that the former yielded cultures with slightly greater neurotoxic secretory activity when challenged with HIV gp120. Following differentiation, the cells were maintained until confluent (~ 1 week) in complete DMEM with no added GM-CSF.

Primary Cultures of Human and Mouse Microglia

Human microglia were obtained from ScienCell and were cultured according to the specified protocol. Mouse microglia were obtained from E16 fetal mice and were cultured from explants of brain tissue. Mice were euthanized in isoflurane and the uterus was removed, washed briefly, and placed in sterile ice cold HEPES buffered Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS). The brain was removed from each fetus, washed sequentially in sterile HBSS followed by complete medium (DMEM + 10% FBS + 20 μg/ml gentamicin). The brain was stripped of membranes and vessels and minced with microdissecting scissors. The tissue pieces were then gently drawn into a syringe fitted with a 21 gauge needle engineered to cut through the tissue (blunt tip with sharpened edges). The needle was removed and the small cores of tissue that were collected in the syringe were then transferred to a 15 ml tube containing 8–10 mls of complete DMEM. The tissue “punches” were gently agitated and then allowed to settle in the tube. The medium above the punches was carefully aspirated and fresh medium was added to approximately 12 mls. The punches were then evenly distributed into one or two-6 well ultra-low adhesion plates such that each well had the tissue from 1–2 brains. The tissue punches formed small balls of tissue which were maintained as a suspension culture. Microglia are the only cells in the culture capable of attaching to the low adhesion surface. After about 4–5 days, microglia growing within the punches begin to migrate out and attach to the plate (Fig. 1a). Over the next week, the numbers of microglia increased until the well was covered with microglia, at approximately 2 weeks (depending on the tissue explant density). This procedure allows for the development of the microglia in a complete neural environment (suspended brain explants) which can easily be washed from the well leaving a pure microglial culture (Fig. 1b).

Preparation of Macrophage/Microglial Conditioned Medium (MCM)

Cultures of macrophages or microglia were stimulated with 200 pg/ml HIV gp120ADA (HIVIIIB had equivalent effects in early characterization studies but are not included) for a period of 1 h to 3 days and conditioned medium was collected to evaluate responses with acute or long-term stimulation depending on the experiments. A primary endpoint was the ability of the conditioned medium to provoke a dysregulation of neuronal intracellular calcium homeostasis as previously described (Meeker et al. 1999, 2005, 2016; Bragg et al. 2002; Williams et al. 2016). Previous characterization studies indicated that the neurotoxic activity accumulated rapidly after stimulation, reaching a maximum after about 1–2 h and staying at a similar level over the next 1–3 days. For studies assessing the direct effects of the LM11A-31 ligand on macrophages or microglia, cultures were stimulated with 10 nM LM11A-31 overnight to pre-establish their phenotype, the medium was then replaced with serum free DMEM to eliminate any direct neuroprotective effects of the ligand on the neuronal test cultures. The cells were then challenged with HIV gp120 and the medium collected after 1 h. Positive and negative controls were treated identically except for omission of LM11A-31 (positive control) or HIV gp120 (negative control). The macrophage/microglial-conditioned medium (MCM) was centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min to remove any cells, centrifuged through a 300,000 MWCO filter and then frozen in aliquots at −80° C.

Neurotoxicity of Macrophage-conditioned Medium

The neurotoxic activity of the medium was tested on primary rat and mouse neurons cultured on coverslips. Neurons at 8–12 days in vitro were loaded with the calcium indicator, Fluo-4 AM (2 μM, Molecular Probes, Inc., Eugene, OR) in aCSF (aCSF: NaCl 137 mM, KCl 5.0 mM, CaCl2 2.3 mM, MgCl2 1.3 mM, glucose 20 mM). After 30 min of dye loading, the coverslip was transferred to a specialized stage for imaging. Cells were maintained in aCSF and time lapse digital images were captured automatically by the Metamorph™ System. Images were captured with a 40 ms exposure every 6 s for 6 min to assess acute effects and every minute for 60 min to assess delayed effects. Three pre-stimulation measurements were taken to establish basal levels of fluorescence at the beginning of each experiment. Neurons were stimulated with MCM at a 1:5 dilution. The increase in fluorescence intensity within each cell was then measured relative to the baseline fluorescence to correct for cell to cell differences in dye loading and intrinsic fluorescence. Cellular responses were averaged across all cells from at least triplicate runs to provide an indication of the “typical” response. In some cases, individual cell response patterns are shown where the average masked important cell-specific profiles.

Primary Cultures of Rat and Mouse Forebrain Neurons

All animal work was done in accordance with NIH animal welfare guidelines and was approved by the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Timed gestational embryonic day 17 (E17) pregnant female Long-Evans rats (Charles Rivers) or E16 CD1 mice (Charles Rivers) were euthanized with isoflurane until breathing and heart stopped. A thoracotomy was performed, the uterus was removed and briefly rinsed in 70% ethanol followed immediately by a rinse and immersion ice cold, sterile HEPES-buffered Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS). The brain was dissected from each fetus, extensively washed and cleaned of dura-arachnoid membrane and visible vessels. The cortex/hippocampus was dissected from each brain and transferred to a 15 ml tube containing 5 ml calcium-magnesium free-HBSS + 2.4 U/ml dispase + 2 U/ml DNase I and incubated for 25–30 min at 36° C. Tissue was triturated and allowed to settle for 2 min. The suspended cells were transferred to a 50 ml culture tube containing 25 ml of complete medium (currently Neurobasal Plus medium with added B27 Plus supplement and glutamine). After several rounds of trituration in 2–3 ml calcium-magnesium free HBSS, the dissociated cells were counted and seeded at a density 20,000 cells/cm2 on poly-D-lysine-treated coverslips. The resulting cultures were &gt; 95% neurons at day 4 after seeding.

Macrophage Morphological Phenotype

Previous studies showed that NGF and proNGF induced different macrophage morphologies which correlated with functional phenotypes (Williams et al. 2015). The phenotypes were identified as predominantly expressing ruffled membranes versus unruffled cells expressing podosomes. To assess changes in these features in response to LM11A-31, cells were quickly washed and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS followed by staining with phalloidin-Alexa488 or phalloidin-rhodamine (Invitrogen/Molecular Probes or Cytoskeleton) for 1 h at a dilution of 1:50 or 1:100 in PBS. Rapid fixation was essential for visualization of the structures as they were very labile. Coverslips were then mounted using Fluoromount (Southern Biotech 0100–01) and digitally imaged on an Olympus XI71 microscope. Cells predominantly expressing ruffles or podosomes were counted with the aid of Metamorph® image analysis software.

Secretome Profiles

Conditions for the analysis of secreted proteins were selected to maximize the detection of proteins associated with neurotoxic activity. For chronic exposure to HIV, the hMDM were stimulated for 3 days in DMEM with 1% FBS plus HIV or HIV + LM11A-31 with daily replenishment. The addition of FBS was necessary to maintain the health of the cells for the extended culture time and was found to have minimal impact on the proteins measured. Medium was collected and centrifuged at 1000 × g for ten minutes to remove any floating cells. The initial characterization of the secretome of macrophages versus microglia was done on this medium. In subsequent comparisons of the effects of LM11A-31, the clarified medium was further centrifuged through a 300,000 MWCO ultrafiltration membrane. The medium was added to a RayBiotech human antibody array L-507 and processed according to the RayBiotech protocol. The array contained a wide variety of proteins representing many different functions such as inflammation, anti-inflammatory, growth, chemotaxis, adhesion, vascular remodeling, and matrix remodeling. Some membrane receptors that may be cleaved and released into the medium were also included. Slide arrays were scanned using an Agilent technologies DNA microarray scanner, and the analysis was carried out using Metamorph software. Internal negative controls scattered throughout the array were used to establish background fluorescence and variation across the array. The minimum detectable fluorescence signal was set at 3.2 standard deviation units above the average background to give a probability of 0.001 that a protein signal would be falsely identified as positive by chance. The linearity of signal detection was verified from internal positive standards. Since absolute signal intensity varied between different arrays, protein expression was normalized to the total signal for all proteins on the array and expressed as a relative fluorescence or optical density value. Expression of each protein was first compared to untreated controls to identify direct effects of LM11A-31 followed by a comparison of the effects of HIV + LM11A-31 vs. HIV. It was assumed that most proteins on the array would not be affected by the stimulus conditions. Thus, in the absence of any drug effects, a correlation of 1.0 would be expected between the control and challenge runs. The data generally fit this assumption with an average correlation of 0.88 across 14 different comparisons. Because of this, significant deviations from the linear regression could be identified when comparing two matched conditions taking into account both the 99% confidence limits for the predicted regression line and the minimum detectable differences outlined above (i.e. a change of at least 3.2 SD units based on experimental variation on the array; a cutoff value of 9453 fluorescence units in the Agilent scans).

To examine the variation associated with different macrophage preparations we initially assessed the secretome from three different monocyte-derived macrophage culture preparations with duplicate or triplicate measures in each run. The average variation within-runs was 12.1–19.9% and 17.0% between runs. Correlations ranged from 0.9382–0.9703 (n = 5) with the same culture preparation and 0.7032 between different cultures with an average standard deviation for the array to array differentials of 4118 (n = 5) indicating relatively good stability of the normalized secretome profile under our culture conditions. The cutoff of 9453 for significant expression based on the background data from all experimental runs was slightly more liberal than a cutoff value based on the differentials from runs of untreated macrophages (13,178; n = 4) but much more conservative that a cutoff value based on unconditioned medium background (2058; n = 4). Based on this criterion, 58.9% of the proteins represented on the array were detectable. Given the relative stability of the secretome across different runs and because of cost limitations, the limited availability of some resources (human MG) and the number of conditions under comparison, single arrays were run for treatment comparisons with duplicate determinations. If a correlation for a matched comparison was poor, the experiment was re-run. Thus, for the exploration of toxic proteins, emphasis was placed on the pattern of changes across different experimental conditions that matched the activity.

Macrophage Calcium Activity

Previous studies showed that neurotrophin stimulation of macrophages resulted in increases in small calcium signaling events that were correlated with the development of a less toxic phenotype (Williams et al. 2015). To assess the effects of the ligand on calcium signaling, macrophages cultured on coverslips were incubated with 10 nM LM11A-31 in aCSF starting 30 min prior to imaging. Time lapse digital images were captured at 150 ms automatically every 6 s for 20 min by the Metamorph™ System. Calcium increases were typically visible in the time lapse as low intensity flashes in individual cells that were often localized to ruffled regions. The activity was not synchronized between cells and the intensity was much lower than that seen with ATP as a positive test stimulus. Three baseline images were captured followed by stimulation. Changes in fluorescence intensity within each cell were measured as described above. Vehicle treated cultures were used to establish baseline activity and the 99.9% confidence limit. Peaks were defined as deviations from basal calcium that exceeded the 99.9% confidence limit and were typically about 20 fluorescence units.

Statistical Analyses

Graphpad Prism software was used for data summaries and graphics. Parametric statistics were used to evaluate most changes induced by HIV ± LM11A-31. In cases where the data were not normally distributed non-parametric statistics were used. Means were calculated for at least three replicate experiments and the standard error of the mean calculated. T-tests were used for paired comparisons, analysis of variance with repeated measures for temporal data and Chi-square for the analysis of cell population distributions. A probability of &lt; 0.05 for rejection of the null hypothesis was considered significant.

Protein array data was analyzed in a stepwise fashion with increasing stringency. As described above, a value 3.2 standard deviation units (p = 0.001) above or below the mean background was calculated and represented the minimum threshold values for a significant change in protein expression. For comparisons between two conditions, a linear regression analysis was performed to provide an index of how well the array results matched. A strong linear regression was almost always seen and protein values that deviated &gt; 3.2 SD units from the predicted regression line were considered significant changes.

Results

LM11A-31 Induced the Formation of a Ruffled Macrophage Phenotype

Previous studies have shown that cultured macrophages with a ruffled phenotype possessed less neurotoxic activity than macrophages with an amoeboid, podosome bearing phenotype (Williams et al. 2016). When hMDM were exposed to 10 nM LM11A-31, the phenotype gradually shifted from an amoeboid morphology to the expression of ruffles. The effects of 1–300 nM LM11A-31 on the proportion of cells expressing ruffles after 1 or 3 days of treatment relative to pretreatment levels (13–19% ruffled) are illustrated in Fig. 2a. LM11A-31 increased the proportion of ruffled cells in a dose-dependent fashion with a peak at approximately 30 nM. A slight decrease in effect was seen at 100–300 nM. The longest exposure time of 3 days with daily replacement resulted in the highest percentage of ruffled cells at all concentrations. The peak percentage of ruffled cells increased from a baseline of 13.1% to 40.1% after three days versus 32.9% after one day. The percentage of ruffled cells in vehicle treated cultures (aCSF) was stable for the duration of the experiment (&lt; 1% change). No significant cell death was seen throughout the experiment. Thus, these results show that exposure to LM11A-31 induced the less toxic, ruffled macrophage phenotype. Previous studies showed that recombinant human nerve growth factor (rhNGF) induced ruffling of hMDM with maximum efficacy at 100 ng/ml (7 nM) (Williams et al. 2015). Comparison of the efficacy of LM11A-31 at 10 nM to 7 nM rhNGF showed that the compound had excellent potency and efficacy, increasing the percentage of ruffled cells from a control level of 36.4 ± 4.2% to 85.6 ± 4.8% after 24 h (Fig. 2b) versus 79.7 ± 7.2% for NGF.

LM11A-31 Induced an Acute Suppression of Calcium Spike Activity in hMDM

The ruffled phenotype and NGF treatment have also been shown to correlate positively with the frequency of intrinsic calcium spikes in MDM (Williams et al. 2015). In contrast, exposure to HIV and a podosome bearing phenotype were negatively associated with calcium spike frequency (Williams et al. 2016). To determine if LM11A-31 mimics the effect of NGF on calcium signaling, we measured calcium spike frequency in MDM treated with LM11A-31 in the presence and absence of HIV gp120. As seen in previous studies, HIV suppressed intrinsic calcium spikes (Fig. 3a). Addition of LM11A-31 prevented the effects of HIV. Comparison of the direct effects of LM11A-31 to untreated cells (Fig. 3b) indicated that LM11A-31 alone did not have a significant effect on calcium spike frequency suggesting that it did not influence intrinsic communication in the MDM cultures.

LM11A-31 Suppressed the Release of Soluble Neurotoxic Factors in Response to HIV gp120

Human MDM were exposed to 10 nM LM11A-31 overnight in complete medium. The cells were then washed with serum free DMEM and challenged by adding HIV gp120 for 1 h to activate the macrophages. When added to neurons, the conditioned medium from hMDM exposed to HIV gp120 (Fig. 4; hMDM + gp120) produced an acute calcium increase followed by partial recovery and then a progressive, delayed increase in calcium (Fig. 4, solid circles) as previously described (Meeker et al. 1999, 2005, 2016; Bragg et al. 2002). Treatment of the hMDM with 10 nM LM11A-31 prior to the HIV gp120 challenge (Fig. 4; hMDM + gp120 + LM11A-31) had no effect on the acute increase in calcium but greatly suppressed the delayed increase in calcium (open circles). The delayed rise in calcium has previously been shown to correlate best with development of neural damage indicating that LM11A-31 should protect neurons from inflammation associated damage. Medium from untreated hMDM (triangles) and addition of HIV gp120 directly to neurons (squares) produced a modest calcium rise with little delayed destabilization. Basal calcium levels (aCSF, diamonds) showed negligible changes over time. Thus, pretreatment with LM11A-31 greatly decreased the release of neurotoxins by macrophages.

Changes in Protein Secretion Linked to Toxicity and LM11A-31 Protection

To better understand the changes associated with toxic activity and the protective actions of LM11A-31, we performed a series of comparisons on antibody arrays representing 507 proteins (L507, RayBiotech) in an attempt to isolate the toxic factor(s) and/or the specific changes that confer protection. Matched pairwise comparisons were made between treated and untreated macrophages and a linear regression analysis was used to evaluate the consistency of the responses and to identify the proteins that changed in response to treatments. The analysis was focused on the identification of changes that would correlate with neurotoxic activity across four different experimental conditions: Untreated, HIV gp120, LM11A-31 and HIV gp120 + LM11A-31. Findings from these studies, summarized below, failed to identify a clear “toxic “ protein but revealed a unique profile for the effects of LM11A-31.

Primary Effects of LM11A-31

Significant changes induced by LM11A-31 for proteins with known effects on CNS function are summarized in Fig. 5. Complete details of the array results are provided in Online Resource 1. Comparison of the direct actions of 10 nM LM11A-31 versus vehicle showed an excellent linear relationship with a correlation of 0.849 indicating minimal variation with changes in only a small subset proteins. The release profile was dominated by growth-related proteins but also included two inflammatory and two anti-inflammatory proteins. The growth factors included a number of growth and differentiation factors (GDF) and the p75NTR interacting molecule, DR6. Fewer proteins decreased in response to LM11A-31 including three potential anti-inflammatory factors (fractalkine, IL-1ra, TGFβ1), one inflammatory cytokine (IL-17B) and matrix remodeling (MMP-12).

Similar results were seen in the presence of HIV gp120 with growth factors again dominating the profile. The regression analysis showed slightly greater variation with a modest correlation of 0.743. Notable changes in the secretome of HIV gp120+LM11A-31 versus HIV gp120 included the increased expression of TNFβ, IL-1α and MMP-9 suggesting a slight inflammatory bias. Decreases were seen in the potentially neuroprotective factors GDF3, BDNF, IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) as well as the potential inflammatory factor, IL-23. MMP-9 and MCP-1 (CCL2), traditionally associated with activation by HIV, remained elevated suggesting that the beneficial effects of LM11A-31 are not due to suppression of their release. However, TIMP-1 expression was increased to a level higher than MMP-9 raising the possibility that a shift in the MMP-9/TIMP-1 ratio might contribute to protection. No other changes could easily explain the reversal of HIV-associated toxicity by LM11A-31. A summary of all proteins on the array is provided in Online Resource 2.

The similarity between the effects of LM11A-31 and HIV gp120 + LM11A-31 prompted us to examine the extent to which the effects of LM11A-31 dominated the secretory profile. A direct comparison of the secretome from cells treated with LM11A-31 to that of cells treated with HIV gp120 + LM11A-31 showed a strong linear relationship (r = 0.941) with no notable changes in the few proteins that fell outside of the confidence limits. The high degree of similarity was consistent with a potent effect of LM11A-31 that overshadowed effects of HIV. A detailed comparison of the secretory profile is provided in Online Resource 3.

Does LM11A-31 Induce a Particular Macrophage Phenotype?

Previous efforts to characterize different macrophage phenotypes have led to various suggested classifications such as M1, M2a, M2b, M2c, M2d based on receptor, gene expression and secretory profiles (Mantovani et al. 2004, 2013; Duluc et al. 2007; Martinez et al. 2008; Varnum and Ikezu 2012; Roszer 2015; Arora et al. 2018). Although it is now widely recognized that these categories do not adequately represent the range of macrophage functions or the plasticity of these cells, we determined if the secretory profile of macrophages exposed to LM11A-31 biased the cells toward one of these suggested phenotypes. The following proteins on the array were identified as reflecting a bias toward the following phenotypes: M1: Activin A, GM-CSF, IFN-γ, IL-1β, IL-12p70, TNFα; M2a: CD163, IL-1ra, IL-1 sRII, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13, TGF-β-1,2; M2b: IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, TNFα; M2c: CD163, IL-10, TGF-β1,2; M2d: IL-6. IL-10, IL-12, LIF, TGF-β1,2, TNFα.

Of these proteins, the largest increases were seen in IL-6 (198%), IFN-γ (91%), IL-1β (87%), IL-4 (78%), IL-10 (44%), IL-13 (33%) and CD163 (27%). The profile in response to LM11A-31 was mixed but the large increase in IL-6, small increases in IL-4 and IL-10 and a decrease in IL-12p70 would favor an M2b-like profile suggesting active tissue remodeling, phagocytosis and decreased TLR signaling. Some M1 activity was suggested by the increased IFN-γ (91%) and IL-1β (87%) but other markers for this phenotype were unchanged or decreased (e.g. IL-12 p70, −37%). While this restricted view is consistent with a shift toward a phenotype with decreased inflammatory activity, it is important to note that the changes in these proteins were relatively small compared to many other proteins on the array with less clearly defined functions (e.g. growth and differentiation factors, matrix metalloproteases, chemokines). These other proteins reflect the huge diversity of MDM functions and highlight the regulation of specific functions beyond the characterization of general activation states.

Macrophages and Microglia Respond Similarly to HIV Gp120 and LM11A-31

To determine if macrophages and microglia both secrete toxic factors in response to HIV gp120, we compared the response of primary human monocyte-derived macrophages to primary adult human microglia as well as microglia grown from mouse neural explants. In matched experiments, medium from macrophages and microglia both produced an acute increase in intracellular calcium followed by a progressive delayed rise (Fig. 6) with no significant differences. Toxin secretion to a strong inflammatory challenge (LPS + INFγ) provoked a much smaller response illustrating that the effects of HIV gp120 are more robust in this context relative to a general inflammatory response.

We reasoned that if microglia and macrophages had distinctively different secretory profiles, it may facilitate the isolation of the common factor associated with neurotoxicity and/or the changes that underlie neuroprotection by LM11A-31. However, comparison of the secretome of macrophages and microglia using RayBiotech antibody arrays for 120 proteins with a focus on secreted cytokines (Ray Bio C1000) revealed few differences under basal conditions (r = 0.927) or with HIV gp120 stimulation (r = 0.851) (not shown). Some differences emerged on a more extensive comparison of the secretomes of MDM and microglia on a higher density array representing 507 proteins (Ray Bio L-507). Correlations were still strong (0.862) under basal conditions indicating highly similar phenotypes (Online Resource 4). However, proteins elevated in the microglial secretome, summarized in Fig. 7, tended to cover a broader range of functions such as neural growth (GDF11, IL-2, IL-15, IL-3), inflammation (IL-6), anti-inflammatory (IL-5), chemotaxis (MCP-1, 2, &amp; 3, IL-8), matrix remodeling (MMP-9, TIMP-1), adhesion (thrombospondins 1 and 2) and vascular development (angiopoietins, angiostatin) than the MDM (growth, inflammation). The protein release profile of MDM was also dominated by growth factors but the specific proteins (GDF3, GDF5, DR6, gremlin, chordin-like) differed from those seen in the microglia. Other proteins such as CD40L and Fas were higher in the macrophage secretome suggesting potential signaling for recruitment of adaptive immune responses and regulation of cell survival.

A greater number of differences were seen after a challenge with HIV gp120 (r = 0.563) but again no unique factor emerged that might predict neurotoxicity (Fig. 7, Online Resource 5). Microglia showed greater secretion of a variety of factors, serving many different functions. The largest differences were seen in growth factors (GDF9, GDF11, GDF15, GCSF, IL-15, Gremlin, follistatin-like 1, chordin-like 2, NRG3), inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IFNγ, TNFβ, IL-1α), anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-13), chemotactic factors (GRO, I-TAC, CXCL14), matrix remodeling (MMP-11, TIMP-1, NRG3), adhesion molecules (LFA-1α) and vascular development (angiopoietin-like 2). However, there were many more similarities than differences between the MDM and microglia again suggesting that these cells share common features and responses to HIV gp120. It is particularly notable that growth-associated proteins again dominated the secretory profile for both MDM (46.2% of the secreted proteins) and microglia (34.2% of secreted proteins) in response to HIV gp120.

Proteins preferentially expressed by MDM represented similar functions as microglia such as growth (erythropoietin, amphiregulin, progranulin, growth hormone, FGF 9), inflammation (IL-17F), anti-inflammatory (IL-10), chemotaxis (MIP-1β), matrix remodeling (MMP-9), and adhesion (thrombospondin, galectin-3). However, the relative levels of different proteins in each functional category indicated that macrophages and microglia may each have a bias for factors released in support of specific functions. For example, while growth-associated proteins dominated the secretory profile for both MDM (46.2% of the secreted proteins) and microglia (34.2% of secreted proteins) in response to HIV gp120, microglia tended to have a bias toward enhanced secretion of growth and differentiation factors (GDFs) compared to the MDM which secreted factors controlling other growth signaling pathways (FGF, EGF, TGFβ). Several of these growth factors such as the GDFs were robustly secreted and have been associated with neuroprotection although the mechanisms are poorly understood. A comparison of the secretory phenotype of both MDM and microglia in response to LM11A-31 again showed that addition of 10 nM LM11A-31 normalized the secretory response to HIV gp120 yielding a very strong correlation (r = 0.951) and only a few differentially expressed proteins (not shown, Online Resource 6). This reinforces the conclusion that the effects of the neurotrophin ligand dominate over HIV gp120 in controlling the secretory phenotype of each cell type. Because of the high degree of similarity in the response profiles, no conclusions could be drawn regarding the source of the protective effects of LM11A-31. Overall, the broad spectrum of growth factors argues strongly for the presence of protective and/or repair responses that accompany the neurotoxic activity. These data emphasize the enormous complexity of macrophage and microglial function and the need to better understand these functions in order to control their damaging effects and to harness their therapeutic potential.

Proteins Changes that Correlate with Medium Toxicity and Effects of LM11A-31

Since both macrophages and microglia secreted neurotoxic factors in response to HIV gp120 we looked for proteins that were upregulated in both cell types in response to HIV gp120 and also down regulated in response to LM11A-31. Eight potentially protective proteins and five potentially toxic proteins met these stringent conditions representing four different experimental preparations (Fig. 8). Of the proteins that increased (potential toxins), endothelin, DR3 and MMP-9 had a known relationship to HIV pathogenesis whereas two were indirectly associated with inflammatory activation (LECT2, EDA-A2). Most notably, MMP-9 showed the greatest overall increases. Of the eight proteins that decreased, only NGF, had a clearly identified protective function in the context of HIV pathogenesis (Ramirez et al. 2001; Peruzzi et al. 2002; Fields et al. 2014; Williams et al. 2016). Decreases in NGF could shift the balance of signaling activity toward p75NTR, an effect that would promote toxicity (Williams et al. 2015).

The MCM protein array data collected in these studies in conjunction with data collected in previous studies provided a range of six experimental conditions with widely varying levels of toxicity. This data allowed us to correlate the changes in protein expression with the functional profile of the medium. Proteins that contribute to neurotoxicity would be expected to have a strong positive correlation and neuroprotective proteins a strong negative correlation. Although with only six conditions the strength of the correlations would not be high, the analysis would still provide a relatively strong comparison across widely ranging experimental conditions. To maximize stringency, we identified proteins with a positive or negative correlation of &gt; 0.9 and eliminated proteins whose expression was too low to provide reliable comparisons. Of the 507 proteins, 30 showed a strong positive and 48 a strong negative correlation with neurotoxic activity. These correlations are summarized in Table 1 with the complete array results provided in Online Resource 7. The results, to a large degree, paralleled the results from the above studies. Positive correlations were seen with CD163, MMP-9, IL-8, IL-17F and IL-12 p70 that are strongly associated with inflammation. However, the positive correlations also included a number of growth factors and protective proteins such as GDF3, GDF8, FGF-9, DcR3, growth hormone and TIMP-1. Thus, we again saw that proteins released in response to HIV gp120 can have opposing actions (e.g. MMP-9 vs. TIMP-1) reflecting an ongoing balance of macrophage functions. This scenario was also repeated when we examined the decrease of proteins associated with protection, leading to negative correlations with toxic activity. These proteins included MMP-7, BMP-8, TGF-beta 3, FDF-19, Tie1, sgp130, M-CSF, IGFBP-3, IGFBP-6, VEGI, betaNGF, GDF11, CCL18 and GDNF verifying that HIV gp120 toxicity is associated with the loss of a wide variety of neuroprotective factors. Of these correlations, the negative correlation with NGF and MMP-7 and the positive correlation with MMP-9 were particularly notable since MMP-7 converts proNGF to NGF (Le and Friedman 2012) and MMP-9 degrades NGF (Bruno and Cuello 2006) Together, these findings provided support for the conclusion that decreases in neurotrophin signaling contribute to the toxic activity of mononuclear phagocytes.

Macrophage Activation and Loss of Nerve Growth Factor Availability.

Since the secretory profile indicated a loss of NGF in response to HIV gp120 and changes in enzymes that control NGF metabolism correlated with toxic activity, we examined the regulation of NGF availability by macrophages. Cultured hMDM were washed with serum free DMEM to remove extracellular proteins, HIV gp120 or vehicle was added and, after 1 h, 500 ng/ml recombinant human NGF was added. Medium was sampled and evaluated for NGF content by Western blot at 1, 4, 8, and 16 h. As illustrated in Fig. 9a, b, NGF was degraded over time in both HIV-treated and untreated cultures. However, the loss of NGF was significantly greater in the hMDM cultures treated with HIV (Fig. 9b). An independent assessment of NGF in the medium (Fig. 9c) relative to the cellular content (Fig. 9d) at 16 h indicated that extracellular NGF was decreased by 65% in the presence of HIV whereas the intracellular content of NGF was unchanged. This was consistent with the presence of extracellular factors that metabolize NGF. To further examine the effects of MDM on NGF metabolism, proNGF was added to the medium in the same fashion as above and the accumulation of NGF and loss of proNGF were tracked over time. Figure 9e illustrates the kinetic profiles from duplicate runs which indicated that proNGF decreased at the same rate in HIV-gp120 or vehicle treated cultures (t1/2 = 2.1–2.3 h) while NGF accumulation was greatly suppressed after 4 h post-HIV-gp120 challenge. Together these findings indicate that factors secreted by macrophages can decrease NGF availability.

Discussion

LM11A-31 Partially Mimics the Effects of NGF on hMDM

The previous demonstration of the co-expression of p75NTR and TrkA on hMDM and the opposing functions of these two neurotrophin receptors (Williams et al. 2015, 2016) introduced the possibility that the function of mononuclear phagocytes could be regulated with neurotrophin ligands. In particular, these studies suggested that down regulation of p75NTR function might reduce the secretion of neurotoxic factors (Williams et al. 2016). When we treated cultures of hMDM with the p75NTR ligand, LM11A-31, we saw a dose-dependent shift toward a ruffled phenotype and a decrease in the secretion of factors that provoke the dysregulation of neuronal calcium. At a concentration of 10 nM, the compound induced the same morphological phenotype as a maximally effective concentration of NGF (7 nM) indicating that it at least partially mimics the effects of NGF with equal potency.

While previous studies suggested that the induction of calcium signaling by NGF correlated with the protective effects (Williams et al. 2016), LM11A-31 did not influence the expression of intrinsic calcium spikes. However, it was able to prevent the suppressive effects of HIV on calcium signaling suggesting that it restricts the ability of HIV to shift the macrophage phenotype. Thus, LM11A-31 does not totally recapitulate the effects of NGF on calcium signaling but was able to prevent the inhibitory effects of HIV.

LM11A-31 Establishes a Unique Macrophage Secretome Profile

LM11A-31, like NGF, offered strong protection against the secretion of neurotoxic factors. The suppression of the ability of macrophages to induce delayed calcium dysregulation without affecting acute calcium signaling is particularly important since the delayed rise is selectively associated with neural dysfunction (Meeker et al. 2016). Our efforts to examine a broad range of secreted proteins led to considerable insights into the diversity of macrophage functions but also highlighted the complex nature of the secretome. LM11A-31 directly influenced the secretion of many proteins and had similar effects on both macrophages and microglia. The dominating effect of LM11A-31 on the secretome indicated that it is a potent regulator of macrophage and microglia phenotype although the underlying mechanism is not well understood. The secretome was rich in growth factors and contained a mix of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Although the secretory pattern was most consistent with an M2b-like phenotype suggesting tissue remodeling and phagocytosis, elements of M1 activation were also present and the changes in cytokine expression were quite small relative to growth factors and other proteins. Overall, the secretory profile in response to LM11A-31 was relatively unique with changes that did not reflect strong inflammatory or anti-inflammatory signatures.

Cultured Macrophages and Microglia Respond Similarly to LM11A-31

Cultures of both hMDM and microglia responded to HIV gp120 with similar toxic activity and secretory profiles. However, under basal conditions, the secretory profile of microglia tended to be more diverse. While both microglia and macrophages secreted factors in the same functional categories it is notable that a different set of proteins was often seen suggesting regulation of slightly different functions. For example, under basal conditions microglia secreted more GDF11 and hMDM GDF3 and GDF5 suggesting support of different growth functions. The differences were more dramatic in response to HIV gp120 where each cell type tended to secrete different proteins within the same functional categories. These differences suggest that microglia and macrophages may have slightly different functional responses to HIV. Importantly, when LM11A-31 was combined with HIV gp120 most differences disappeared and a high correlation was seen between macrophages and microglia indicating strong control of the phenotype of both cell types.

Correlates of Neurotoxicity and Protection

Since a primary goal of these studies was to better understand the processes that underlie neurotoxic activity and mechanisms that afford protection, we looked for unique signatures that might reflect toxic or protective effects. Typical generic markers of immune activation (TNFα IL-1, IL-6) had no clear relationship to the neurotoxic activity. As noted above, attempts to classify the findings into previously defined phenotypic categories based on the secretory patterns did not adequately represent the complexity of the secretome or shed light on the pathways that cause toxicity or offer protection. Instead, robust secretion of other proteins highlighted the importance of factors that regulate specific functions. Of particular note was the large number of growth factors secreted in response to LM11A-31, such as the GDFs. This raised the possibility that the protective effects of LM11A-31 could be due to a shift in hMDM phenotype toward functions that support growth and repair. Although this aspect of macrophage function is not often emphasized, it is noteworthy that early studies of neurotoxin production in cultures of damaged neocortical tissue noted a component of the secretome that had protective activity (Giulian et al. 1993). In addition, a comparison of CSF toxicity profiles of post-HAART samples from HIV infected patients versus pre-HAART, revealed a pattern not only indicating decreased toxicity but also potential neuroprotective activity (Meeker et al. 2011). While the source of these putative protective factors was unknown, our observations indicate that mononuclear phagocytes could contribute significantly. Enhanced release of GDF11 and GDF15 during combined stimulation with LM11A-31 and HIV gp120, in the current study were of particular interest due to growing evidence in support of positive effects on neural function. GDF11 has been investigated as a factor with neurorestorative and antiaging properties (Katsimpardi et al. 2014; Mendelsohn and Larrick 2014; Castellano et al. 2015; Rochette and Malka 2019). GDF15 has been shown to increase following stroke (Groschel et al. 2012; Wallentin et al. 2014), in Parkinson’s patients (Yao et al. 2017) and in patients with age-related cognitive decline (Jiang et al. 2016; Cardoso et al. 2018). GDF15 increases are thought to be a protective mechanism since it supports hippocampal neurogenesis (Carrillo-Garcia et al. 2014) and has been shown to be protective in models of Parkinson’s disease (Strelau et al. 2003; Machado et al. 2016). We have not yet been able to demonstrate direct neuroprotective effects of GDF11 in the inflammatory model (unpublished data), but the high level of expression of this protein and other GDFs warrants further investigation.

Difficulty in the identification of a clear toxin suggests three possible scenarios: 1) the responsible protein or protein fragment is not represented on the array, 2) the toxin is not a protein or 3) toxicity is due to a combination of factors that synergize to promote neurodegeneration. Macrophages secrete factors that can have toxic effects on neurons including other proteins not represented on the array (e.g. granzyme B) (Boivin et al. 2009; Elavazhagan et al. 2015), potential excitotoxins (glutamate, quinolinate, other small molecules) (Giulian et al. 1990, 1996; Heyes et al. 1991, 2001; Jiang et al. 2001) and microvesicles (Wu et al. 2015). Centrifuging the conditioned medium at 300 kDa in our experiments minimized the potential contribution from microvesicles. Excitotoxins may contribute partially to the toxic profile. In previous experiments, we have challenged neurons with glutamate or quinolinate at concentrations in the MCM or CSF of HIV-infected individuals. Under these conditions, acute calcium responses were seen supporting the presence of such factors but we did not recapitulate the late calcium rise associated with neurodegenerative changes. These observations are consistent with the lack of an effect of LM11A-31 on the acute calcium increase in previous and current experiments. The possibility of interacting factors is of course the most complex. In previous studies, we showed that MMP-9, one of the most robustly secreted proteins, had minimal effects on calcium homeostasis but greatly enhanced the sensitivity of neurons to a very low, subtoxic concentration of glutamate that was then able to trigger the late destabilization of calcium (Williams et al. 2016). The high release of MMP-9 was replicated in the current experiments and there was a high positive correlation between MMP-9 levels and toxicity. The sensitization effect of MMP-9 may partially explain why previous studies examining glutamate and quinolinate have failed to support their role as a macrophage toxin in this context (Giulian et al. 1996). However, since LM11A-31 treatment did not always significantly suppress MMP-9 it is unlikely that suppression of MMP-9 release contributed to the protective effects of the ligand.

When we probed the expression patterns in greater depth using data across different conditions to determine which proteins were regulated in both hMDM and microglia in a fashion that was consistent with both the toxic profile of the medium and effects of LM11A-31, MMP-9 again showed the greatest overall changes. Although levels of the endogenous MMP antagonist, TIMP-1, did not meet the criterion for significant change, LM11A-31 increased the TIMP-1 to MMP-9 ratio suggesting an increase in the ability to suppress the activity of MMP-9. Three additional proteins with inflammatory potential also met the criterion (EDA-A2, endothelin and soluble DR3) although their role in HIV pathogenesis is less clear due to a paucity of data. Of the proteins that decreased with HIV gp120 and were restored by LM11A-31, four could be considered neuroprotective/anti-inflammatory (beta NGF, angiopoietin-like 1, IL-19 and DcR3) highlighting the ability of LM11A-31 to promote an environment that favors protection. For example, angiopoietin-like 1, IL-19 and DcR3 have been implicated in protection from traumatic brain damage (Brickler et al. 2018), downregulation of microglial activation (Horiuchi et al. 2015) and protection from Alzheimer disease related damage by promoting an M2a like phenotype (Liu et al. 2017), respectively. Perhaps the most interesting finding was the decrease of NGF in the secretome of both macrophages and microglia. The combined correlations provided additional evidence for a relationship between loss of NGF signaling and toxic activity. Two enzymes that regulate the availability of NGF were strongly correlated with medium neurotoxicity. MMP-7 which converts proNGF to NGF (Le and Friedman 2012) was negatively correlated (r = −0.991) with toxicity and MMP-9 which degrades NGF (Bruno and Cuello 2006) had a strong positive correlation (r = + 0.938). Although the absolute changes in MMP-7 expression were not high enough to meet our stringent criteria, the weight of the combined evidence clearly indicated that HIV gp120 established conditions that reduced the ability to sustain normal concentrations of NGF.

Direct evidence of neurotrophin dysregulation was seen when the kinetics of NGF or proNGF loss were evaluated in macrophage cultures treated with HIV gp120. Although no change in the rate of proNGF turnover was seen, these experiments showed both a decreased synthesis and increased turnover of NGF that was similar to studies of neurotrophin dysmetabolism in early Alzheimer disease (Bruno et al. 2009b). Studies of the degradative enzyme MMP-9, in particular, have linked increased activity to early disease progression. Samples of human cortical tissue from patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) had greater MMP-9 activity (Bruno et al. 2009a; Pentz et al. 2020) which correlated with cerebral Aβ and Tau deposition (Pentz et al. 2020) and evidence of increased microglial activation (Bruno et al. 2009b; Ferretti and Cuello 2011). Together, these findings provide support for the conclusion that macrophage activation can cause a loss of trophic support that leads to decreased protection and a shift in the phenotype of the mononuclear phagocytes toward a more toxic profile (Williams et al. 2016). By directly engaging and modulating the activity of p75NTR, LM11A-31 may help to compensate for these deficits.

An “anti-inflammatory” effect of LM11A-31 is also supported by in vivo studies showing that it reduces the extent of microglial activation in animal models of Alzheimer (Nguyen et al. 2014) and Huntington disease (Simmons et al. 2016). Exactly how LM11A-31 exerts these effects is still unclear but may be associated with activation of PI3K/Akt signaling pathways as seen in neurons (Longo and Massa 2013).

In summary, the p75NTR ligand, LM11A-31, has excellent protective efficacy due to its ability to suppress neurotoxic activity in macrophages and microglia. The protective effects correlated with a shift in the morphological phenotype of macrophages and the induction of a unique secretory phenotype that overrode the actions of HIV gp120. The effects of LM11A-31 were similar in hMDM and microglia indicating a conserved responsiveness to the modulation of neurotrophin signaling. No clear candidates responsible for neurotoxic activity were identified, although MMP-9 remains a strong contender. Classical inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6) failed to explain the effects of the conditioned medium on neurons and cytokine changes were greatly outweighed by the prominent release other factors such as growth factors. GDFs in particular were robustly secreted. One of the more notable patterns in the secretome was a strong positive correlation between neurotoxic activity and MMP-9, which degrades NGF, and a corresponding negative correlation with NGF and MMP-7, which produces NGF. Thus, the data support the possibility that HIV gp120 reduces beneficial neurotrophin signaling which can then be restored by LM11A-31. Loss of neurotrophin support combined with still unknown toxic factors would make neurons highly vulnerable to the inflammatory effects of HIV. Overall, the complexity of the secretome, highlights the need for additional studies to reveal the mechanisms that selectively control the various functions of these cells, particularly in response to neurotrophin signaling. In spite of our limited understanding, the data clearly indicate that the ligand LM11A-31 has excellent therapeutic potential due to its ability to induce a less toxic macrophage/microglial phenotype that restricts activation by HIV.

Supplementary Material

Online Resource 2

Online Resource 1

Online Resource 7

Online Resource 3

Online Resource 5

Online Resource 4

Online resource 6

Acknowledgements

These studies were funded by National Institutes of Health Grants: R01 NS083164 (RBM), R01 MH085606 (RBM), R21 AG056924 (RBM), F31 MH101019 (KSW) and F32 HL085025 (DAK).

Funding

R01 NS083164 (RBM), R01 MH085606 (RBM), R21 AG056924 (RBM), F31 MH101019 (KSW) and F32 HL085025 (DAK).

Data Availability

A complete set of array data is provided in the Online Resources. Any additional data will be made available on request.

Fig. 1 Example of a microglial culture. a A suspended “punch” with microglia attached to the surface of the plate underneath. b Microglia remain on the surface of the ultra low adhesion plate after removal of tissue punches. The microglia are &gt; 99% pure by morphology, DiI Acyl LDL uptake and CD11b stain

Fig. 2 LM11A-31 changes the morphological phenotype of macrophages. a LM11A-31 treatment for one or three days induced a dose-and time dependent increase in the percentage of ruffled MDM with significant dose effects emerging at 10 nM (p = 0.009, 2-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons) and reaching a peak effect at 30 nM (p = 0.002, 2-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons). Treatment for three days produced greater ruffling than one day (p = 0.002, one way ANOVA) indicating a gradual shift to the ruffled phenotype. b Treatment with LM11A-31 (10 nM) produced an increase in ruffling comparable to a maximally effective concentration of NGF (7 nM)

Fig. 3 LM11A-31 prevents HIV gp120 associated changes in calcium signaling. a The reduction in the frequency of MDM calcium spikes induced by HIV gp120 was prevented by treatment with 10 nM LM11A-31 (p = 0.0002, HIV vs HIV + LM11A-31). b Treatment with 10 nM LM11A-31 for 2 days had no effect on intrinsic calcium spikes

Fig. 4 Change in neuronal intracellular calcium (Fluo-4 fluorescence) induced by conditioned medium (1:5) from hMDM treated with HIV gp120 in the presence or absence of LM11A-31 In the absence of LM11A-31, the medium from HIV gp120 treated macrophages evoked a large acute increase in intracellular calcium followed by partial recovery and a delayed calcium rise. Conditioned medium from macrophages pretreated with 10 nM LM11A-31, washed and then challenged with HIV gp120 provoked the same acute response but failed to induce a significant delayed rise. Control cultures treated with medium from untreated hMDM or HIV gp120 alone showed small acute responses but no delayed rise. No significant changes in intracellular calcium were seen after addition of aCSF (vehicle). Values are mean ± sem

Fig. 5 Changes in the hMDM secretory profile induced by 10 nM LM11A-31 in the presence and absence of HIV gp120. The secretome profile of 507 proteins of matched macrophage cultures from a single donor for each pairwise comparison. The matched comparisons were measured in duplicate in the presence and absence of LM11A-31 (top) and in macrophages treated with HIV gp120 in the presence and absence of LM11A-31 (bottom). The runs were well-matched with correlations of 0.849 and 0.743. The chart summarizes protein changes within different functional groups that have known effects on neural function. The complete profile is available in Online Resources 1–2. The profile was dominated by proteins associated with neural growth but also includes factors associated with inflammation, chemotaxis and matrix remodeling. Values represent the average of duplicate determinations

Fig. 6 Intracellular calcium (fluorescence) increases in response to monocyte-derived macrophage conditioned medium (MCM) or microglial conditioned medium (MGCM) after treatment with HIV gp120. Experiments were run in parallel with cell density matched as closely as possible. Macrophages treated with LPS + INFγ were included to illustrate the general effects of a strong inflammatory stimulus for comparison. Various controls (pretreatment MCM, untreated MCM, conditioned medium from neurons treated with HIV gp120 and aCSF) evoked, at most, small acute increases but no delayed calcium accumulation

Fig. 7 Comparison of changes in the microglial secretory profile versus the macrophage profile in the presence or absence of HIV gp120 + LM11A-31. The secretome profile of 507 proteins measured in duplicate from matched untreated macrophage and microglial cultures from individual donors were compared in the absence (top) and presence (bottom) of HIV gp120 + LM11A-31. The runs were well-matched under basal conditions (r = 0.862) but showed greater variability in the presence of HIV gp120 and LM11A-31 (r = 0.563). The chart summarizes protein changes within different functional groups that have known effects on neural function. The complete profile is available in Online Resources 4–5. The profile is dominated by effects on proteins associated with neural growth but also included factors associated with inflammation, chemotaxis, matrix remodeling, adhesion and vascular growth. Values represent the average of duplicate measures

Fig. 8 Proteins that showed significant paired decreases in protective proteins or increases in deleterious proteins in both monocyte derived macrophage conditioned medium (MCM) and microglial conditioned medium (MGCM). Each protein also showed opposite changes in response to LM11A-31, consistent with the toxic profile of the conditioned medium

Fig. 9 Enhanced degradation of NGF by MDM in the presence of HIV gp120 a Western blot illustrating the time dependent loss of recombinant mature human NGF added to MDM. NGF was added to the MDM culture (500 ng/ml) and tracked using Santa Cruz H-20 anti-NGF (1:500). b Average of 4 experiments showing that a more rapid loss of NGF is seen when the MDM are exposed to HIV gp120 (p &lt; 0.001, main effect of treatment, two way ANOVA, *p’s &lt; 0.005 by multiple post-hoc comparisons). c HIV gp120 challenged macrophages have 64% less endogenous extracellular NGF 16 h post challenge (p = &lt; 0.0012, t test). d In contrast to the extracellular medium (c), cell lysates have equivalent NGF content. e Exogenous proNGF added to the medium (500 ng/ml) decreased at a similar rate in macrophage cultures in the presence or absence of HIV (Millipore 04–1142 anti-proNGF, 1:500). A comparable increase in NGF was seen which was highly correlated with the decrease in proNGF (r &gt; 0.999, p = 0.0138). The increase in NGF was abolished after 4 h in the presence of HIV (r = 0.163, p = 0.896)

Table 1 Protein-Toxicity Correlations

Toxicity Correlates			Relative Calcium Rise	
HIV+proNGF			1.49	
HIV Avg			1	
HIV+NGF			0.485	
LM11A-31			0.14	
Control - aCSF			0.108	
HIV+LM11A-31			0.08	
Protein	Positive Correlation	Protein	Negative Correlation	
	
CD 163	0.985	MMP-7	−0.991	
BMP-2	0.98	LFA-1 alpha	−0.99	
CD30 / TNFRSF8	0.974	TGF-beta RII	−0.987	
GDF3	0.973	MMP-14	−0.986	
Insulin R	0.969	GM-CSF R alpha	−0.985	
MIP 2	0.969	IL-12 p40	−0.983	
E-Selectin	0.967	MMP-1	−0.98	
Erythropoietin	0.966	Growth Hormone R (GHR)	−0.976	
FGF-9	0.964	IL-17R	−0.975	
IL-8	0.962	MMP-13	−0.971	
Progranulin	0.959	BMP-8	−0.967	
IL-17F	0.957	TGF-beta 3	−0.964	
Activin RIIA	0.956	CXCR1 / IL-8 RA	−0.961	
IL-22 R	0.955	B7-1 /CD80	−0.961	
Orexin A	0.955	FGF-19	−0.961	
DcR3 / TNFRSF6B	0.948	Fas Ligand	−0.961	
MMP-9	0.938	CTLA-4 /CD152	−0.959	
BD-1	0.934	IL-20	−0.95	
IL-12 p70	0.933	Tie-1	−0.949	
MIP-1b	0.929	GRO-a	−0.949	
IL-4 R	0.927	NAP-2	−0.945	
Galectin-3	0.923	sgp130	−0.944	
Epiregulin	0.919	IL-20 R alpha	−0.943	
Angiostatin	0.913	MCP-2	−0.942	
Growth Hormone (GH)	0.912	M-CSF	−0.942	
CRTH-2	0.907	IGFBP-6	−0.941	
GDF8	0.907	HCR / CRAM-A/B	−0.941	
Endoglin / CD105	0.898	VEGI / TNFSF15	−0.936	
BTC	0.898	Thymopoietin	−0.936	
TIMP-1	0.896	MDC	−0.934	
		IGFBP-3	−0.928	
		MIP-3 alpha	−0.928	
		IGF-I SR	−0.926	
		beta-NGF	−0.926	
		SDF-1 / CXCL12	−0.924	
		SCF	−0.923	
		GDF11	−0.923	
		Eotaxin / CCL11	−0.915	
		PARC / CCL18	−0.912	
		CXCR5 /BLR-1	−0.912	
		Osteoprotegerin / TNFRSF11B	−0.911	
		G-CSF R / CD 114	−0.907	
		Dkk-1	−0.906	
		BLC / BCA-1 / CXCL13	−0.904	
		GDNF	−0.902	
		Thrombospondin-4	−0.899	
		TRAIL R4 / TNFRSF10D	−0.899	
		VEGF R2 (KDR)	−0.896	
Strong positive correlations ≥0.9, reflecting a relationship to toxic activity, and strong negative correlations &lt; −0.9, reflecting an inverse relationship to toxicity, are summarized from a total of 507 proteins. Toxicity values used for the correlations are indicated at the top. The total list of proteins and relative toxicity values are provided in Online Resource 7. Proteins of particular interest due to known actions related to central nervous system function or relevance to CNS HIV infection are highlighted in bold. Values represent average fluorescent brightness levels from the RayBiotech L507 antibody array. Abbreviations for the proteins detected by antibodies on the array are indicated in the assay reference materials: https://www.raybiotech.com/l-series-507-label-based-human-array-1-glass-slide-2/

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s11481-021-10002-x.

Competing Interests Dr. Longo, co-author, is listed as an inventor on patents relating to a compound in this report that is assigned to the University of North Carolina. Dr. Longo is a principal of, and has financial interest in PharmatrophiX, a company focused on the development of small molecule ligands for neurotrophin receptors that has licensed several of these patents. Dr. Longo provided the compound, LM11A-31, for these studies as an unrestricted gift. He consulted on the use of the compound and reviewed the manuscript but did not participate in the design or conduction of any experiments.


References

Al-Shawi R , Hafner A , Olsen J , Chun S , Raza S , Thrasivoulou C , Lovestone S , Killick R , Simons P , Cowen T (2008) Neurotoxic and neurotrophic roles of proNGF and the receptor sortilin in the adult and ageing nervous system. Eur J Neurosci 27 :2103–2114 18412630
Arora S , Dev K , Agarwal B , Das P , Syed MA (2018) Macrophages: Their role, activation and polarization in pulmonary diseases. Immunobiology 223 :383–396 29146235
Boivin WA , Cooper DM , Hiebert PR , Granville DJ (2009) Intracellular versus extracellular granzyme B in immunity and disease: challenging the dogma. Lab Invest 89 :1195–1220 19770840
Bragg DC , Boles JC , Meeker RB (2002) Destabilization of neuronal calcium homeostasis by factors secreted from choroid plexus macrophage cultures in response to feline immunodeficiency virus. Neurobiol Dis 9 :173–186 11895370
Brickler TR , Hazy A , Guilhaume Correa F , Dai R , Kowalski EJA , Dickerson R , Chen J , Wang X , Morton PD , Whittington A , Ahmed A , Theus MH (2018) Angiopoietin/Tie2 Axis Regulates the Age-at-Injury Cerebrovascular Response to Traumatic Brain Injury. J Neurosci 38 :9618–9634 30242049
Bruno MA , Cuello AC (2006) Activity-dependent release of precursor nerve growth factor, conversion to mature nerve growth factor, and its degradation by a protease cascade. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103 :6735–6740 16618925
Bruno MA , Mufson EJ , Wuu J , Cuello AC (2009a) Increased matrix metalloproteinase 9 activity in mild cognitive impairment. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 :1309–1318 19915485
Bruno MA , Leon WC , Fragoso G , Mushynski WE , Almazan G , Cuello AC (2009b) Amyloid beta-induced nerve growth factor dysmetabolism in Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 68 :857–869 19606067
Cardoso AL , Fernandes A , Aguilar-Pimentel JA , de Angelis MH , Guedes JR , Brito MA , Ortolano S , Pani G , Athanasopoulou S , Gonos ES , Schosserer M , Grillari J , Peterson P , Tuna BG , Dogan S , Meyer A , van Os R , Trendelenburg AU (2018) Towards frailty biomarkers: Candidates from genes and pathways regulated in aging and age-related diseases. Ageing Res Rev 47 :214–277 30071357
Carrillo-Garcia C , Prochnow S , Simeonova IK , Strelau J , Holzl-Wenig G , Mandl C , Unsicker K , von Bohlen Und Halbach O , Ciccolini F , (2014) Growth/differentiation factor 15 promotes EGFR signalling, and regulates proliferation and migration in the hippocampus of neonatal and young adult mice. Development 141 :773–783 24496615
Castellano JM , Kirby ED , Wyss-Coray T (2015) Blood-Borne Revitalization of the Aged Brain. JAMA Neurol 72 :1191–1194 26237737
Duluc D , Delneste Y , Tan F , Moles MP , Grimaud L , Lenoir J , Preisser L , Anegon I , Catala L , Ifrah N , Descamps P , Gamelin E , Gascan H , Hebbar M , Jeannin P (2007) Tumor-associated leukemia inhibitory factor and IL-6 skew monocyte differentiation into tumor-associated macrophage-like cells. Blood 110 :4319–4330 17848619
Elavazhagan S , Fatehchand K , Santhanam V , Fang H , Ren L , Gautam S , Reader B , Mo X , Cheney C , Briercheck E , Vasilakos JP , Dietsch GN , Hershberg RM , Caligiuri M , Byrd JC , Butchar JP , Tridandapani S (2015) Granzyme B expression is enhanced in human monocytes by TLR8 agonists and contributes to antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. J Immunol 194 :2786–2795 25667415
Fahnestock M , Michalski B , Xu B , Coughlin MD (2001) The precursor pro-nerve growth factor is the predominant form of nerve growth factor in brain and is increased in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol Cell Neurosci 18 :210–220 11520181
Ferretti MT , Cuello AC (2011) Does a pro-inflammatory process precede Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment? Curr Alzheimer Res 8 :164–174 21345170
Fields J , Dumaop W , Langford TD , Rockenstein E , Masliah E (2014) Role of neurotrophic factor alterations in the neurodegenerative process in HIV associated neurocognitive disorders. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 9 :102–116 24510686
Giulian D , Vaca K , Noonan CA (1990) Secretion of neurotoxins by mononuclear phagocytes infected with HIV-1. Science 250 :1593–1596 2148832
Giulian D , Corpuz M , Chapman S , Mansouri M , Robertson C (1993) Reactive mononuclear phagocytes release neurotoxins after ischemic and traumatic injury to the central nervous system. J Neurosci Res 36 :681–693 8145296
Giulian D , Yu J , Li X , Tom D , Li J , Wendt E , Lin SN , Schwarcz R , Noonan C (1996) Study of receptor-mediated neurotoxins released by HIV-1-infected mononuclear phagocytes found in human brain. J Neurosci 16 :3139–3153 8627353
Groschel K , Schnaudigel S , Edelmann F , Niehaus CF , Weber-Kruger M , Haase B , Lahno R , Seegers J , Wasser K , Wohlfahrt J , Vollmann D , Stahrenberg R , Wachter R (2012) Growth-differentiation factor-15 and functional outcome after acute ischemic stroke. J Neurol 259 :1574–1579 22231869
Heyes MP , Ellis RJ , Ryan L , Childers ME , Grant I , Wolfson T , Archibald S , Jernigan TL (2001) Elevated cerebrospinal fluid quinolinic acid levels are associated with region-specific cerebral volume loss in HIV infection. Brain 124 :1033–1042 11335705
Heyes MP , Brew BJ , Martin A , Price RW , Salazar AM , Sidtis JJ , Yergey JA , Mouradian MM , Sadler AE , Keilp J , Rubinow D , Markey SP (1991) Quinolinic acid in cerebrospinal fluid and serum in HIV-1 infection: relationship to clinical and neurological status. Ann Neurol 29 :202–209 1826418
Horiuchi H , Parajuli B , Wang Y , Azuma YT , Mizuno T , Takeuchi H , Suzumura A (2015) Interleukin-19 acts as a negative autocrine regulator of activated microglia. PLoS One 10 :e0118640 25794104
Jiang J , Wen W , Sachdev PS (2016) Macrophage inhibitory cytokine-1/growth differentiation factor 15 as a marker of cognitive ageing and dementia. Curr Opin Psychiatry 29 :181–186 26731555
Jiang ZG , Piggee C , Heyes MP , Murphy C , Quearry B , Bauer M , Zheng J , Gendelman HE , Markey SP (2001) Glutamate is a mediator of neurotoxicity in secretions of activated HIV-1-infected macrophages. J Neuroimmunol 117 :97–107 11431009
Katsimpardi L , Litterman NK , Schein PA , Miller CM , Loffredo FS , Wojtkiewicz GR , Chen JW , Lee RT , Wagers AJ , Rubin LL (2014) Vascular and neurogenic rejuvenation of the aging mouse brain by young systemic factors. Science 344 :630–634 24797482
Knowles JK , Simmons DA , Nguyen TV , Vander Griend L , Xie Y , Zhang H , Yang T , Pollak J , Chang T , Arancio O , Buckwalter MS , Wyss-Coray T , Massa SM , Longo FM (2013) Small molecule p75NTR ligand prevents cognitive deficits and neurite degeneration in an Alzheimer’s mouse model. Neurobiol Aging 34 :2052–2063 23545424
Kolson DL (2002) Neuropathogenesis of central nervous system HIV-1 infection. Clin Lab Med 22 :703–717 12244593
Le AP , Friedman WJ (2012) Matrix metalloproteinase-7 regulates cleavage of pro-nerve growth factor and is neuroprotective following kainic acid-induced seizures. J Neurosci 32 :703–712 22238106
Liu YL , Chen WT , Lin YY , Lu PH , Hsieh SL , Cheng IH (2017) Amelioration of amyloid-beta-induced deficits by DcR3 in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Mol Neurodegener 12 :30 28438208
Longo FM , Massa SM (2013) Small-molecule modulation of neurotrophin receptors: a strategy for the treatment of neurological disease. Nat Rev Drug Discov 12 :507–525 23977697
Longo FM , Yang T , Knowles JK , Xie Y , Moore LA , Massa SM (2007) Small molecule neurotrophin receptor ligands: novel strategies for targeting Alzheimer’s disease mechanisms. Curr Alzheimer Res 4 :503–506 18220511
Machado V , Haas SJ , von Bohlen Und Halbach O , Wree A , Krieglstein K , Unsicker K , Spittau B (2016) Growth/differentiation factor-15 deficiency compromises dopaminergic neuron survival and microglial response in the 6-hydroxydopamine mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 88 :1–15 26733415
Mantovani A , Biswas SK , Galdiero MR , Sica A , Locati M (2013) Macrophage plasticity and polarization in tissue repair and remodelling. J Pathol 229 :176–185 23096265
Mantovani A , Sica A , Sozzani S , Allavena P , Vecchi A , Locati M (2004) The chemokine system in diverse forms of macrophage activation and polarization. Trends Immunol 25 :677–686 15530839
Martinez FO , Sica A , Mantovani A , Locati M (2008) Macrophage activation and polarization. Front Biosci 13 :453–461 17981560
Meeker RB , Robertson K , Barry T , Hall C (1999) Neurotoxicity of CSF from HIV-infected humans. J Neurovirol 5 :507–518 10568888
Meeker RB , Boles JC , Robertson KR , Hall CD (2005) Cerebrospinal fluid from human immunodeficiency virus–infected individuals facilitates neurotoxicity by suppressing intracellular calcium recovery. J Neurovirol 11 :144–156 16036793
Meeker RB , Poulton W , Markovic-Plese S , Hall C , Robertson K (2011) Protein changes in CSF of HIV-infected patients: evidence for loss of neuroprotection. J Neurovirol 17 :258–273 21556959
Meeker RB , Poulton W , Feng WH , Hudson L , Longo FM (2012) Suppression of immunodeficiency virus-associated neural damage by the p75 neurotrophin receptor ligand, LM11A-31, in an in vitro feline model. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 7 :388–400 22161560
Meeker RB , Poulton W , Clary G , Schriver M , Longo FM (2016) Novel p75 neurotrophin receptor ligand stabilizes neuronal calcium, preserves mitochondrial movement and protects against HIV associated neuropathogenesis. Exp Neurol 275 (Pt 1 ):182–198 26424436
Mendelsohn AR , Larrick JW (2014) Systemic factors mediate reversible age-associated brain dysfunction. Rejuvenation Res 17 :525–528 25400086
Mocchetti I , Bachis A (2004) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor activation of TrkB protects neurons from HIV-1/gp120-induced cell death. Crit Rev Neurobiol 16 :51–57 15581399
Mocchetti I , Nosheny RL , Tanda G , Ren K , Meyer EM (2007) Brain-derived neurotrophic factor prevents human immunodeficiency virus type 1 protein gp120 neurotoxicity in the rat nigrostriatal system. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1122 :144–154 18077570
Mufson EJ , Counts SE , Ginsberg SD , Mahady L , Perez SE , Massa SM , Longo FM , Ikonomovic MD (2019) Nerve Growth Factor Pathobiology During the Progression of Alzheimer’s Disease. Front Neurosci 13 :533 31312116
Nguyen TV , Shen L , Vander Griend L , Quach LN , Belichenko NP , Saw N , Yang T , Shamloo M , Wyss-Coray T , Massa SM , Longo FM (2014) Small molecule p75NTR ligands reduce pathological phosphorylation and misfolding of tau, inflammatory changes, cholinergic degeneration, and cognitive deficits in AbetaPP(L/S) transgenic mice. J Alzheimers Dis 42 :459–483 24898660
Peng S , Wuu J , Mufson EJ , Fahnestock M (2004) Increased proNGF levels in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and mild Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63 :641–649 15217092
Pentz R , Iulita MF , Ducatenzeiler A , Bennett DA , Cuello AC (2020) The human brain NGF metabolic pathway is impaired in the pre-clinical and clinical continuum of Alzheimers disease. Mol Psychiatry Epub
Peruzzi F , Gordon J , Darbinian N , Amini S (2002) Tat-induced deregulation of neuronal differentiation and survival by nerve growth factor pathway. J Neurovirol 8 (Suppl 2 ):91–96 12491158
Pulliam L , Herndier B , Tang N , McGrath M (1991) Human Immunodeficiency Virus-infected Macrophages Produce Soluable Factors that cause Histological and Neurochemical Alterations in Cultured Human Brains. J Clin Invest 87 :506–512
Ramirez SH , Sanchez JF , Dimitri CA , Gelbard HA , Dewhurst S , Maggirwar SB (2001) Neurotrophins prevent HIV Tat-induced neuronal apoptosis via a nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)-dependent mechanism. J Neurochem 78 :874–889 11520908
Rochette L , Malka G (2019) Neuroprotective Potential of GDF11: Myth or Reality? Int J Mol Sci 20
Roszer T (2015) Understanding the Mysterious M2 Macrophage through Activation Markers and Effector Mechanisms. Mediators Inflamm 2015 :816460 26089604
Shi J , Longo FM , Massa SM (2013) A small molecule p75(NTR) ligand protects neurogenesis after traumatic brain injury. Stem Cells 31 :2561–2574 23940017
Simmons DA , Belichenko NP , Ford EC , Semaan S , Monbureau M , Aiyaswamy S , Holman CM , Condon C , Shamloo M , Massa SM , Longo FM (2016) A small molecule p75NTR ligand normalizes signalling and reduces Huntington’s disease phenotypes in R6/2 and BACHD mice. Hum Mol Genet 25 :4920–4938 28171570
Streit WJ (2005) Microglia and neuroprotection: implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res Rev 48 :234–239 15850662
Strelau J , Schober A , Sullivan A , Schilling L , Unsicker K (2003) Growth/differentiation factor-15 (GDF-15), a novel member of the TGF-beta superfamily, promotes survival of lesioned mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons in vitro and in vivo and is induced in neurons following cortical lesioning. J Neural Transm Suppl: Issue 65:197–203
Tep C , Lim TH , Ko PO , Getahun S , Ryu JC , Goettl VM , Massa SM , Basso M , Longo FM , Yoon SO (2013) Oral administration of a small molecule targeted to block proNGF binding to p75 promotes myelin sparing and functional recovery after spinal cord injury. J Neurosci 33 :397–410 23303920
Varnum MM , Ikezu T (2012) The classification of microglial activation phenotypes on neurodegeneration and regeneration in Alzheimer’s disease brain. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (warsz) 60 :251–266 22710659
Wallentin L , Hijazi Z , Andersson U , Alexander JH , De Caterina R , Hanna M , Horowitz JD , Hylek EM , Lopes RD , Asberg S , Granger CB , Siegbahn A (2014) Growth differentiation factor 15, a marker of oxidative stress and inflammation, for risk assessment in patients with atrial fibrillation: insights from the Apixaban for Reduction in Stroke and Other Thromboembolic Events in Atrial Fibrillation (ARISTOTLE) trial. Circulation 130 :1847–1858 25294786
Williams KS , Killebrew DA , Clary GP , Meeker RB (2016) Opposing Effects of NGF and proNGF on HIV Induced Macrophage Activation. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 11 :98–120 26420421
Williams KS , Killebrew DA , Clary GP , Seawell JA , Meeker RB (2015) Differential regulation of macrophage phenotype by mature and pro-nerve growth factor. J Neuroimmunol 285 :76–93 26198923
Wu B , Huang Y , Braun AL , Tong Z , Zhao R , Li Y , Liu F , Zheng JC (2015) Glutaminase-containing microvesicles from HIV-1-infected macrophages and immune-activated microglia induce neurotoxicity. Mol Neurodegener 10 :61 26546362
Yang T , Knowles JK , Lu Q , Zhang H , Arancio O , Moore LA , Chang T , Wang Q , Andreasson K , Rajadas J , Fuller GG , Xie Y , Massa SM , Longo FM (2008) Small molecule, non-peptide p75 ligands inhibit Abeta-induced neurodegeneration and synaptic impairment. PLoS One 3 :e3604 18978948
Yao X , Wang D , Zhang L , Wang L , Zhao Z , Chen S , Wang X , Yue T , Liu Y (2017) Serum Growth Differentiation Factor 15 in Parkinson Disease. Neurodegener Dis 17 :251–260 28787735
Zeng F , Lu JJ , Zhou XF , Wang YJ (2011) Roles of p75NTR in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: a novel therapeutic target. Biochem Pharmacol 82 :1500–1509 21762680
