LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


9604391
21634
Drug Discov Today
Drug Discov Today
Drug discovery today
1359-6446
1878-5832

36634842
9975055
10.1016/j.drudis.2023.103487
NIHMS1863653
Article
Hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) and drug discovery in the context of Alzheimer’s disease and related tauopathies
Moore Kendall B.E. 1
Hung Ta-Jung 1
Fortin Jessica S. 1
1 Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue University, 625 Harrison Street, West Lafayette, IN, USA
Corresponding author: Fortin, J.S. (fortinj@purdue.edu)
9 1 2023
3 2023
09 1 2023
01 3 2024
28 3 103487103487
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia, characterized by intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and extracellular β-amyloid (βA) plaques. No disease-modifying therapy is currently available to prevent the progression of, or cure, the disease. Misfolded hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) is considered a pivotal point in the pathogenesis of AD and other tauopathies. Compelling evidence suggests that it is a key driver of the accumulation of NFTs and can be directly correlated with the extent of dementia in patients with AD. Therefore, inhibiting tau hyperphosphorylation-induced aggregation could be a viable strategy to discover and develop therapeutics for patients with AD.

Teaser:

Hyperphosphorylated tau represents a key target for Alzheimer’s disease drug discovery.

dementia
amyloid
tau
Alzheimer’s
therapy
hyperphosphorylation

pmcIntroduction: dementia and Alzheimer’s disease

Diseases affecting cognitive function, namely dementia, are among the most challenging global health concerns.1 Dementia, a syndrome characterized by chronic and progressive deterioration of cognition, mainly affects older people more than what is expected from the usual consequences of aging.1 It has a deleterious impact on normal functions, such as memory, orientation, thinking, comprehension, judgment, and language.1 WHO estimates that 55.2 million people were living with dementia in 2022.2, 3 and 4 This is expected to rise to nearly 75 million in the year 2030, which will nearly double to 132 million by the year 2050 (Figure 1).1 Dementia was the seventh leading cause of mortality in 2019, as reported by WHO.2, 3 and 4 The disease has profound psychological and economic impacts on patients, families, and caregivers. An estimated US$1.3 trillion is spent annually on in-home or facility care.2, 3 and 4 However, many patients with dementia receive free care from a relative or neighbor, with its value estimated to be US$271.6 billion in the USA alone.3 As a result, WHO has assigned a priority status to dementia and published a Global Action Plan on the Public Health Response to Dementia 2017–2025.4

Dementia encompasses a variety of noncommunicable cognitive diseases that hinder a person’s quality of life.1 Approximately twothirds of patients with dementia have been diagnosed with AD.1 The National Institute of Aging (NIA) estimates that AD accounts for 6 million cases of dementia in the USA.5 Dr Alois Alzheimer, the namesake of the condition, was the first to observe the trademark structures of AD upon autopsy of a female patient.6 Within the brain, Alzheimer discovered the accumulation of protein clumps.6 Preceding death, the patient exhibited dysarthria and amnesia, two typical symptoms of dementia that result from the aforementioned accumulations.6 Unprecedented progress in the understanding of AD has been made since Alzheimer’s findings, especially in recent decades.7 In a theorem known as the amyloid hypothesis, scientists have suggested that AD can be attributed to two key contributors: primarily, plaques comprising Aβ, which accumulate extracellularly, and secondarily, intracellular misshapen tau proteins conglomerations known as NFTs.8 Unbeknown to him at the time, these are the components that Alzheimer observed when discovering protein clumps in the brain. The damage caused by amyloid plaques and NFTs first affects the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex, two neuroanatomical structures responsible for memory.9 As more neuronal death occurs, additional areas of the brain become affected, resulting in brain shrinkage. Finally, widespread damage to the brain leads to significant atrophy.9

AD can be classified by its origin, either hereditary or sporadic.10 Hereditary AD is the result of a genetic mutation affecting APP, PSEN1, or PSEN2.10,11 It is suggested that ten additional genetic risk factors exist, with the most notable being extra APOE ε4 alleles.11 The other form of AD, that of sporadic origin, can be classified as developing from any non-genetic source.10 Sporadic cases, accounting for &gt;95% of all patients with AD, can develop from the environment or epigenetics, or a combination thereof.10 Both forms of AD can be identified with the same diagnostic techniques; however, the disease is often diagnosed after phenotypic symptoms arise. The advent of neural imaging techniques, such as structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computerized tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography (PET), has proved to be an invaluable tool for detecting AD.7 These diagnostics have enabled clinicians and neuroscientists to gauge the spatial-temporal distribution of amyloid plaques and NFTs.7

Although symptomatic treatment is available, there is no cure or prevention for AD.10 By continuously investigating AD pathogenesis, opportunities for the discovery of effective therapeutics might become available. Recent insights into the molecular pathogenic mechanisms of AD have provided interesting leads with Aβ and tau anti-aggregation activities. In this review, we focus on the role of p-tau in the pathogenesis of AD and strategies to investigate p-tau anti-aggregation therapeutics.

Structure of tau and its isoforms

To better understand tau, it is important to investigate the cellular components involved. As a microtubule-associated protein, tau interacts with the microtubule structures of the cytoskeleton.12 Microtubules maintain cell structure and assist in mitosis.12 Microtubule-associated proteins, including tau, can attach to microtubules, altering the stability of the structure.12 These proteins are encoded by genes; specifically, tau is encoded by a gene on the 17q21 chromosome.13 Six key isoforms (0N3R, 1N3R, 2N3R, 0N4R, 1N4R, and 2N4R) can be generated from the splicing of exons 2, 3, and 10 from the 1614 or 21 total exons of this gene (Figure 2).13,15 There are six additional tau isoforms derived from exon 6, but they are less abundant, poorly understood, and infrequently discussed.15,16

The functionality of each tau isoform is dependent on the number of N-domain inserts and repetitive microtubule-binding domain (MBD) sites. Vast differences have been noted between 3R and 4R isoforms and, to a lesser extent, among the 0N, 1N, and 2N isoforms.17 Sealey et al. noted that Drosophila expressing the 0N3R isoform were prone to shorter lifespans, complications regarding axoplasmic transport, and difficulty in locomotion.17 Meanwhile, Drosophila models exhibiting the 0N4R isoform of tau experienced difficulty completing memory and learning tasks and widespread neurodegeneration, suggesting that the 4R isoform mainly affects sensory neurons and causes membrane degradation.17 Such results reflect the established notions that 3R tau is involved in the creation of pathways between axons, after which the 4R isoforms become more prevalent.17,18 Sealey et al. also investigated the role of 3R and 4R isoforms in seeding, finding that 3R isoforms can seed both 3R and 4R isoforms of tau; however, 4R isoforms can only seed fellow 4R isoforms.17 The differences in functionality among 0N, 1N, and 2N isoforms have not been explored in depth, but their distribution trends have been identified. Both the 0N and 2N isoforms are predominantly located in the soma and axon regions of the neuron.17 Meanwhile, 1N isoforms are typically located in the dendrites and nucleus of the neuron.17 0N isoforms are the more commonly expressed isoforms in mice, whereas 1N isoforms are predominant in humans, residing particularly in the spinal cord.19 Of all the isoforms, those classified as 0N and/or 4R aggregate at a greater frequency compared with the aggregation potential of other isoforms.20 The 1N isoforms are also most commonly found within AD tau aggregates.20

The slight genetic differences of each isoform influence their distribution at various life stages.17 Tau isoforms are present in the human brain throughout life, contrary to the typical association of tau with age-related, neurodegenerative disease.21 The shortest isoform, 0N3R, comprising 352 amino acids, can even be found in the fetal stage.21 As a person develops into an adult, more tau isoforms of greater length and additional repeat segments occur in the brain.21 At this point, there are relatively equal amounts of 3R and 4R isoforms present.17 When this ratio becomes unbalanced, and the tau isoforms become hyperphosphorylated, tauopathies begin to emerge. For example, patients with Pick’s disease have more 3R isoforms compared with healthy counterparts.22 Other diseases, including progressive supranuclear palsy and argyrophilic grain disease, showcase increased expression of 4R isoforms.22 In particular, the largest isoform, 2N4R, has immense affinity for proteins associated with neurodegeneration.17All six of the main tau isotopes are present in the NFT tangles of AD.19,23 However, NFTs in AD present an approximately equimolar ratio of 3R and 4R tau isoforms. Interestingly, previous studies in rodents showed that 4R leads to long-distance spreading of the tau pathologic effect, in contrast to 3R tau.24 The six isoforms characteristic of AD are all hyperphosphorylated versions of tau and are unable to stabilize microtubules, resulting in PHF and NFT formation.23

Tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation

In its native state, tau has a low propensity to misfold; however, as its randomly coiled structure gradually rearranges into β-sheet conformation, it increasingly favors aggregation.25 The β-pleated sheets allow for increased monomeric interactions of p-tau, hence, amplified aggregation.26 Post-translational modifications (PTMs) describe actions performed upon tau to shift it from its native form to a morbific state. Four main PTMs alter the nature of tau: phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, and protein fragmentation, with the most common (and notable) being phosphorylation.27 PTMs follow myriad scripts, including cleaving the tau, adding a functional group, changing the charge of certain amino acids, utilizing enzymatic activity, or a combination thereof.27 Certain PTMs, including phosphorylation, acetylation, and nitration, induce a negative charge on the tau molecule. This is hypothesized to disrupt microtubule structure and cause tau aggregation.28 Other PTMs, such as succinylation and glycosylation, are observed in AD samples at specific sites, but not in controls, suggesting a relationship between the development of AD and these PTMs.29,30 Whereas normal succinylation regulates mitochondria metabolism, one trademark symptom of AD is decreased mitochondrial efficiency, supporting another link between AD and succinylation.29

Increased phosphorylation, deemed hyperphosphorylation, is the PTM with the strongest connection to AD. Under normal function, phosphorylation is an important PTM for maintaining proteostasis.28 Phosphorylation is a reversible reaction that adds phosphate groups to polar amino acid residues, specifically, serine (Ser), threonine (Thr), or tyrosine (Tyr).28 The addition of a phosphate group induces a negative charge on the target molecule, increasing the hydrophilic characteristic of proteins.28 This dynamic polarity helps regulate protein interactions, signaling cascades, and protein degradation.28 In contrast to these typical neuronal functions, hyperphosphorylation results in modified tau disassociating from microtubules and forming oligomeric structures that eventually aggregate into NFTs.31 The effects of NFT formation include neurite outgrowth and the deregulation of axonal transport, resulting in a general deterioration of brain function.28

The predominant type of post-translationally modified tau that plagues the brain of patients with AD is AD p-tau.27 The most notable kinases identified in tau phosphorylation include glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), protein kinase A (PKA), microtubule-affinity regulating kinase (MARK), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), and Fyn.32 Experiments show increased amounts of phosphorylation with AD samples compared with healthy ones, with ~44 residues phosphorylated compared to ~20 measured in the healthy state.28 As such, AD p-tau is saturated with three to four times the amount of phosphate per mole compared with normal tau.33 This is the result of many exposed phosphorylation sites; for instance, the 2N4R tau isoform can be phosphorylated at 85 unique sites, with 80 of these corresponding to Ser and/or Thr residues.33–35 Other research indicates that phosphor-sites show increased signaling during Braak stages 0–I, but not during stages III–IV; this can be explained by phosphorylated tau binding with non-modified tau to form multimers.31 However, phosphor-sites with increasing denatured tau within this study did not conform to normal sites with aggregation used in NFT staining and immunohistochemical Braak staging.31 When comparing AD pathology and phosphorylation, certain phospho-sites do not exhibit tau-aggregation, such as sites with proximity to an N terminus; conversely, phospho-sites close to C termini and microtubule-binding areas experienced acceleration of filament formation, suggesting a relationship between specific phospho-sites and NFT formation.28

AD p-tau can override the microtubule-stabilizing nature of normal tau and degrade microtubules because of a decreased affinity for the structure.27 Aggregation begins with tau hyperphosphorylation.36 Ideally, in native tau protein, the MBD is protected by its N- and C-terminal regions, but because of structural changes caused by hyperphosphorylation, the MBD is revealed.37 This simple change increases the probability of the p-tau molecule self-aggregating, while also decreasing its affinity for binding to microtubules. The charge balance existing between tau and microtubules is disturbed when phosphate molecules are bound to tau, causing the p-tau monomers to leave their microtubule host in search of aggregation.36

Once a large quantity of p-tau is amassed, the moieties come together in small clusters known as oligomers, which then form paired helical filaments (PHFs).38 The previously soluble AD p-tau is now insoluble within the PHF, and more difficult to disband.27 Normal tau is still present in the AD brain, but at a level ~60% less than in the healthy adult brain.27 Given the high number of phosphate molecules in p-tau, more phosphorylation sites become available.27 As a result, more self-assembly occurs, and PHFs accumulate into NFTs.27 A multitude of factors have the potential to increase the frequency of aggregation or the number of aggregates. For instance, missense or deletion mutations can increase the rate of tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation.26 Tau truncation can also increase the rate of aggregation, because it exposes microtubule-binding repeat sites on the protein.26 Finally, nefarious proteins capable of stabilizing p-tau or NFTs, as well as cofactors with negative charges, can increase aggregation.26

Tau oligomers

As mentioned briefly, individual units (monomers) of p-tau cluster to form oligomers. Oligomers are generated when monomers attach to either end, with the center units serving as nuclei.39 The oligomer can continue to grow unchecked as this process repeats.39 These oligomers are intermediate structures preceding fibrillary tangles.40 Recent publications have suggested that pre-tangle tau oligomers are more toxic than their successors40–42 and are the main culprit behind neurodegeneration. Oligomers are especially toxic because of their ability to induce oxidative stress within the cell through damage to the mitochondria.42 Studies have reported a decreased incidence of mitochondria and its related complex I subunits in brains subject to oligomer injections.42 Mitochondrial damage is succeeded by apoptosis, which has been directly linked to toxic oligomers because it occurs before NFT fibril formation.42 Furthermore, the inability of normal tau to bind with microtubules inhibits normal cellular functions and paves the way for cell death.35 The spread of oligomers throughout the brain correlates with the distribution of AD-affected areas and disease progression.39 Such spread can be juxtaposed with the spread of amyloid fibrils, the presence of which does not correlate with the spread of diseased neural regions.39,42 These findings suggest that oligomers are the main determinants of disease dispersion. Furthermore, oligomers of a brain-derived source are more toxic to neural cells compared with those from a recombinant source.43

As a result of a study with wild-type mice, Lasagna-Reeves and colleagues concluded that brain-derived tau oligomers induce memory deficits.43 These results were based on behavioral tests conducted on two groups of wild-type mice 3 days after a hippocampal injection. The first group received tau oligomers, whereas the second received an aliquot of tau PHF.43 Interestingly, when a separate group of knockout-type mice was injected with brain-derived tau oligomers, no memory deficits were noted.43 The researchers suggested that this result represents an ability of naturally occurring tau to provide neuroprotective effects by blocking oligomer toxicity.43 Eleven months after the injection, the mice were sacrificed, and their brains stained and analyzed, showing that the injected PHF had not propagated or spread to other regions of the brain. Meanwhile, the group injected with tau oligomers showcased extensive tau filament spread, reaching beyond the hippocampus to the cortex, hypothalamus, and corpus callosum.43

Interestingly, other research groups have focused on transitional states between tau and NFTs, such as tau oligomers, with multiple oligomeric variations including hyperphosphorylated, unphosphorylated, soluble, and insoluble states. It is believed that soluble tau oligomers cause toxicity preceding the formation of NFTs.44,45 Both soluble and insoluble tau oligomers have been shown to be linked to neuronal degeneration. Experiments have proven that soluble tau oligomer injections cause synaptic loss in vivo, and display prionlike characteristics of cross-seeding.44,46 However, previous work demonstrated that solubility-decreasing treatments applied to tau rescued toxicity in vivo and provided differentiation for insoluble tau: nontoxic unphosphorylated, and toxic hyperphosphorylated.47

Multiple technologies have been developed to detect oligomer formations in the brain. Tau oligomers are buffer-soluble, making them simple to isolate from obtained fractions.48 Historically, the most prominent mechanism used was western blot.48 Electron microscopy, size-exclusion chromatography, and immunohistochemistry are three additional technologies proven suitable to conduct oligomeric detection.48 Antibodies, such as tau oligomeric complex 1 (TOC1) from the Binder lab, and the T22 antibody from the Kayed lab, have the potential to stain and identify pre-tangle oligomeric tau structures.48 As increasing focus is placed on oligomers as the toxic species of AD, additional protocol and detection standards will be developed.

Tau seeding and spreading

Oligomeric tau can propagate through a process known as seeding. Seeding is a proliferation-spreading mechanism utilized by prions during the course of disease.49 When oligomers undergo seeding, they travel to nearby locations, where native tau proteins is being infected by them, perpetuating the propagation of aggregates.26,50 The receiving tau is now a pathogenic aggregate and can act as a donor seed to infect other native tau proteins.26 Seeds can bridge the synapse from one neuron to the next, either through vesicles or independently during pinocytosis (Figure 4).26,50 The uptake, aggregation, secretion, and transfer of seeds repeats itself again and again, promoting rapid spread between neurons.26 Even native tau in the cytoplasm is at risk of becoming aggregated, because donor aggregates can desert their vesicles and directly interact with these unsuspecting proteins.26 There are no established limits to where p-tau can extend because seeding can spread aggregates between brain regions and along neural networks.50 It is through this process that the disease progresses, and AD symptoms worsen for the patient. Furthermore, it has been suggested that microglia also serve a role in aggregate propagation.26 As the immune cells of the brain, microglial cells serve as macrophagic protectors that consume pathogens. Unfortunately, when microglia consume aggregates and seeds through phagocytosis, seeds are further propagated, and disease is spread.26

The need for tau-based therapies

Post-mortems of AD brains show that progression of Aβ plaques starts with exclusively neocortical lesions and spreads to the hippocampus, pons, and cerebellum.51 The spatiotemporal distribution of amyloid plaques does not correlate with progressive cognitive impairment in AD.52,53 For a decade, AD drug discovery has been dominated by anti-Aβ therapeutics, mainly Aβ-clearing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and β-site amyloid precursor protein (APP)-cleaving enzyme (BACE) inhibitors.54 In Phase III clinical trials, these drug candidates failed to improve cognitive functions of patients with AD, casting doubt on the Aβ-centric amyloid hypothesis.55,56 Aβ plaques accumulate in the brain and consequently activate microglia, neuroimmune cells involved in sensing, housekeeping, and defense of the brain.57 These microglial cells then adopt proinflammatory states, which contribute to p-tau, but this does not necessarily constitute an upstream event in the aggregation and formation of NFTs. Importantly, it is believed that tau oligomers contribute to neuron toxicity58–60 and might have an important role in AD neurodegeneration. The spatiotemporal distribution of NFTs, which comprise primarily p-tau, has been shown to coincide with neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment in AD.61,62

Another concern with therapies targeting Aβ is the success rate in animal models versus humans. Even when statistically significant results are achieved with Aβ-inhibiting therapies in animal models, success in human clinical trials is not always reciprocated. Furthermore, in the event that Aβ clearage was achieved, the phenotypic symptoms of AD were not alleviated and cognitive function did not improve.63 This scenario is best illustrated with the inoculations introduced to eliminate Aβ build-up, because many were successful in transgenic mouse models, but not in patients with AD. One vaccine, AN1792, was successful in eradicating extracellular Aβ plaques in patients with AD, but their symptoms of AD were not alleviated.64 Given the inability of Aβ therapies to alleviate cognitive decline, it can be concluded that the frequency of amyloid deposits is not a major contributor to disease.63

With the stagnation in successful AD therapeutic development, perhaps the focus of researchers should shift from abolishing Aβ plaques to preventing or destroying NFTs.63 As discussed previously, the hyperphosphorylation and subsequent accumulation of malformed tau proteins creates NFTs; therefore, researchers must focus on designing therapies targeting tau to obliterate NFTs. Given the relationship between tau build-up and AD pathogenesis, tau therapeutics will likely be more successful at alleviating phenotypic symptoms.62 In validating techniques to predict the cognitive functions of patients with AD, Gold et al. found that the presence of NFTs in autopsy, compared with amyloid plaque accumulation, had a stronger correlation with dementia symptoms.65 Given the stepwise process of NFT creation, six strategies to eliminate tau and subsequent NFTs have been identified (Figure 5).

Animal models of tau

Drosophila model

With its relatively brief lifespan and vast reproduction potential, Drosophila melanogaster is widely used as an important model in tau research.66 Its use enables in-depth large-scale forward genetic screening and reverse genetic studies.2 The Drosophila genome contains ~75% of the pathogenic variants found in mammals.2 Furthermore, its genome accommodates one particular homolog to the gene encoding tau in humans.66 This homolog encodes a protein with five characteristic binding domains for microtubules, which is staggeringly similar to the 3R and 4R regions of human tau.66 Interestingly, the tau protein of Drosophila remains hyperphosphorylated within the tauopathy models and refuses to aggregate.67 Studying tauopathy models of Drosophila permits understanding of gene interactions and subsequent biological pathways related to tau, including microtubule dynamics, the equilibrium of kinases and phosphatases, and the kinetics of actin-binding proteins.66 In addition, phenotypes induced by the accumulation of tau can be quantified in the Drosophila model. Phenotypes reflective of tauopathy include learning and memory deficits, reduced lifespan, locomotion defects, changes in the neuromuscular junction, and ocular or neural degeneration.66 Scoring of these phenotypes can be performed in a simple and fast manner, and on a large scale, to identify tau pathology and its modifiers.68 The possibilities for creating Drosophila models by using a GAL4 Upstream Activator Sequence system (GAL4-UAS) are seemingly endless. The GAL4-UAS system has been utilized to insert wild-type or human, of both normal and mutant, tau protein genes.3 The biggest disadvantage to the Drosophila model is that, compared with mice or other vertebrates, the brain anatomy is relatively simple in contrast to the complexity of the human brain.66

Zebrafish model

Characterized by rapid growth and reproduction capabilities, the freshwater zebrafish makes for an excellent vertebrate model.69 In contrast with the 75% of pathogenic homologs shared by Drosophila and mammals, zebrafish shares nearly 84% of disease-linked genes with mammals.66 Not only is the anatomy of the central nervous system similar to that of humans, but zebrafish are transparent as larvae.66 This makes them well suited for developmental gene modifier identification and in vivo imaging. As larvae and as adults, zebrafish exhibit tau-related phenotypes, thereby providing a substantial model for drug screening concerning neurodegenerative diseases.66 Currently, the best-known and most effective zebrafish model of tauopathy overexpresses Tau-P301L, a human gene encoding tau proteins.70 The greatest advantage of this model is its quick development of tauopathy phenotypes, including tangle formation and cellular degeneration, in the embryonic stage.70 A second successful zebrafish model for tauopathy exhibits the human variant A152T.1 The zebrafish of this model have difficulties with pathfinding, locomotion, and escape, possible because of a reduced number of motor neurons.1 These tauopathic phenotypes provide an excellent basis for testing neuroprotective drugs and better understanding tau protein interrupters.

Caenorhabditis elegans model

Caenorhabditis elegans is a small worm with rapid reproduction capabilities.71 Given the numerous mutant offspring that can be generated, C. elegans is a particularly effective model study for tauopathies concerning genetic modification. Approximately 60–80% of the C. elegans genome is shared with that of humans, with several genes associated with various human diseases.72 Transgenic models of C. elegans to study neurodegeneration can be produced through two methods: microinjecting transgenic DNA into the worm or performing microparticle bombardment, in which gold particles are coated with the target DNA and driven into the worm at high speeds.73 Many tauopathic phenotypes, including tau phosphorylation and axonal degeneration, develop over time as the worm ages.74 The type of human tau utilized influences the behavioral phenotypes of C. elegans, such as touch response, uncoordinated moving, or thrash rates.74 One particularly effective C. elegans model was reported by Kraemer and coworkers, who noted that the model expressed mutated human tau.75 The mutant tau proved to be toxic, leading to motor dysfunction, neuronal death, and early expiration of the organism.75 In this model, accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins was observed, resulting in neurodegeneration and axonal vacuolization.75 Although primitive, the C. elegans model can prove to be a particularly helpful model when observing tauopathy.

Loligo pealeii model

Loligo pealeii, commonly known as the longfin inshore squid, is a more unconventional model for tauopathy. Given its variable seasonal and locational availability,76 this model is not suitable for every lab. Researchers are targeting the squid giant synapse because of its excellent properties for studying modifications in the synapse at both the molecular and chemical levels.77 The microtubules of L. pealeii have similar polymerization and depolymerization properties to those of humans and other mammals.76 L. pealeii has a particularly impressive axoplasm system, with axons larger than those of mammals, allowing for easy visualization and study of the microtubules enclosed in this area.76 The axoplasm is also remarkably stable when suspended in Buffer X, and maintains its polarity.40,76 This model allows for the use of multiple analytical techniques; after dissection and isolation of the axoplasm, the axons can be biochemically or microscopically analyzed, or utilized for microtubule dynamic studies.76 In particular, the giant squid model has allowed for the study of tau phosphorylation and aggregation effects.40 Patterson et al. used axoplasm assays from the L. pealeii model to demonstrate that prefibrillar tau is more toxic than NFTs.40,78 Although nontraditional, the L. pealeii model contains untapped potential for the study of microtubules and related therapeutics in the field of tauopathies.

Rodent models

Over the past decade, research has focused on developing genetically modified rodents to reproduce key clinical, histopathological, and molecular attributes of human tauopathies.6,10,11,79,80 Rodents are particularly effective for modeling tauopathies because the similarity of their brain structure to that of humans, and it has been proven that human tau can comingle with mouse tau, with the former having the ability to seed the latter.6,43,81 Furthermore, rodents exhibit phenotypic traits characteristic of human neurodegenerative disease.6 Rats present many advantages for conducting cognitive behavioral assessment, with a more elaborate central nervous system and higher cognitive abilities.6 Intracerebral inoculation of tau fibrils in rat brains has yielded important insights into tauopathies.24,82–86 In both the rat and human brain, pre-tangle misfolded p-tau hypothetically propagates through seeding aggregation.49,58,87–89 Compared with the mouse tau proteome, that of the rat is more akin to the tau proteome of humans, because the adult rat brain shares six tau isoforms with the human brain.79,90 By comparison, many of the murine models of neurodegenerative disease only share one isoform with humans.80 However, mice are often chosen over rats because focusing on only one isoform can be advantageous, given the higher chances of gaining new pathogenic insights and greater reproducibility to demonstrate proof of concept.

One of the best-known transgenic mouse models expressing tau isoforms is the PS19 P301S model. These mice were created through administration of mutant human microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and a mouse prion protein promoter into fertilized murine eggs [008169 - Tau P301S (PS19) Strain Details (www.jax.org)].91 The mice exhibit mutant human MAPT and the 1N4R isoform in much greater quantities compared with their typical murine MAPT, leading to the development of traditional AD symptoms by 3 months of age. PS19 P301S mice exhibit limb weakness followed by paralysis and an inability to perform normal bodily functions.91 Pathological findings first appear around 3 months of age, becoming more noticeable as the mouse ages. Between the ages of 6 to 9 months, neuroinflammation, neuron death, and widespread tangle development are evident throughout the brain.80,91 As such, the lifespan is limited to 12 months of age for 80% of these mice.91 Given the similarities in symptomatic and pathogenic findings, PS19 P301S mice serve as excellent models for conducting proof-of-concept studies.

A second prominent murine model is the Tg4510 model, an aggressive model in which the P301L mutation becomes overabundant when the human tau gene is overexpressed.10 Mice of this model exhibit the 0N4R isoform from the MAPT P301L transgene.92–94 Similar to the PS19 P301S model, Tg4510 mice are created through implantation of a mouse prion protein promoter and the transgene into fertilized murine eggs [015815 - Tg(tauP301L)4510 Strain Details (www.jax.org)].92–94 Onset of pathological symptoms is rapid in Tg4510 mice, leading to severe neuronal deficits and death at a young age.10 Interestingly, this model can be bred to other models to create progeny mice with reversible MAPT expression in the brain.92–94 These crossbred mice exhibit up to 13 times the amount of mutant PS301L tau compared with natural murine tau.92–94 As such, the Tg4510 model and its resulting crossbred progeny are key players in unlocking the secret to treating tauopathies. A similar model to the Tg4510 mouse is the Tau-Alone model. In contrast to Tg4510, the Tau-Alone model exhibits slow expression because of the lack of an activator transgene for P301L.11 Tau-Alone mice might never present with symptoms of neurodegeneration, and often will not have detectable tangles.11

The final mouse model of note is one that shares all six MAPT isoforms with humans: htau. htau mice do not express any of their own native MAPT genes; therefore, with insertion of a transgene including the mutant human MAPT gene, the six encoded isoforms are easily expressed (www.jax.org/strain/005491).95,96 The creation of htau mice begins with insertion of a mutation into the MAPT exon in tau-knockout mice.95,96 This mutation and its subsequent protein sequence are then fused into the blastocysts of embryonic stem cells belonging to female mice.95,96 Pathological changes in the form of hyperphosphorylated tau can be noted in htau mice as young as 3 months, whereas paired helical filaments of tau are observable at 2 months of age.95,96 The presence of neurological changes consistent with tauopathies makes htau an enticing model organism, especially considering their rapid onset compared with other models. However, this model can require seeding with stereotaxic surgery to obtain abundant NFTs. Therefore, with a variety of models available, it is desirable to use animal models based on the same p-tau isoform used for in vitro drug candidate screening assays.

Screening methods

A multitude of screening methods are utilized for visualizing, quantifying, and/or identifying both tau oligomers (early-stage aggregation) and fibrils (late stage aggregation). Depending on the stage of aggregation, different screening methods are used.

Western blot

Western blot is a technology that allows for detection of proteins in a sample. It is most useful for oligomers in the early stages of aggregation. The technique involves the use of gel electrophoresis to differentiate oligomers by their molecular weight. For the assessment of anti-oligomer activity, p-tau can be treated with vehicle or drug candidate at 37°C for 24, 48, and/or 72 h before loading samples into the gel. Following electrophoresis, the oligomers undergo electrophoretic transfer and move to a blotting membrane.97 Washing and blocking are two final steps to minimize the background and allow for accurate antibody binding, respectively.97 To visualize the results, tau oligomer-specific antibodies, such as T22 or TOMA, are used to tag the proteins.97,98 Tau oligomer antibodies are not species specific, and Sengupta et al. note the use of rabbit and mouse antibodies in their experiments. In the field of drug discovery, western blot allows for the detection of oligomers and a determination of their size as a way of quantifying the success of the proposed compound.

Dot blot

As a simplified version of the western blot, dot blot techniques serve to merely detect the presence of oligomers and give no indication of the size of the protein. This is because of the elimination of the electrophoresis step, given that the sample is immediately spotted on the nitrocellulose membrane before treatment with antibodies.99 Similar to the western blot, dot blot is best utilized when testing early-stage aggregates. When reading the results, darker splotches indicate a greater amount of protein in the sample. Dot blot is a relatively quick, inexpensive way to determine oligomeric presence in a sample. This method is only semiquantitative, and its largest drawback is its inability to estimate the size of the oligomers.99

1-Amilinonapthalene-8-sulfonic acid analysis

1-Amilinonapthalene-8-sulfonic acid (ANS) is a fluorescent probe that can be used to detect tau oligomers in a sample.100 ANS fluoresces most when bound to proteins of molten-globular conformation.100 It binds to oligomers, staining the sample before quantification.100 After probing with ANS, the sample is placed in a quartz cuvette or a well in titration plate and loaded into a spectrofluorometer. This analysis results in a fluorescence spectrum characterized by a sigmoidal curve, noting the wavelength and fluorescence intensity for the measured species. ANS has little effect on lag-time or fibril growth, making it an excellent choice to observe oligomer presence.100 However, the user should exercise caution in using conserved amounts of ANS, because an excess amount of this fluorescent probe can appear as unbound background noise on the spectra.100

Photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins

Photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins (PICUP) is an in vitro method of determining tau oligomer size via quantitative measures.101 It involves crosslinking, which is the formation of protein–protein bonds between monomers to form oligomers.101 This technique also includes the photo-oxidation transformation of Ru2+ via visible light into Ru3+.101,102 Using PICUP generates covalently linked tau oligomers that are stable and capable of being used in future studies, such as denaturing via SDS-PAGE.88,89 Advantages of PICUP include the ability to test unmodified monomers at diverse temperatures and/or pH values and/or drug candidates, and exposure to small amounts of nondestructive light.88,89 One of the only disadvantages of PICUP is that not all monomers can react with Ru species and/or form crosslinking bonds.101

Thioflavin T screening

The Thioflavin T (ThT) fluorophore is one of the best-known fluorescent techniques for identifying both in vitro and in vivo tau fibril formation.100,103 ThT is a positively charged fluorescent benzothiazole dye that has been used since 1959103 to bind tau fibrils before reading via a spectrofluorometer.100 ThT binds to hydrophobic sites and ridges on the fibril.103 It fluoresces most with solvents at lower temperatures and/or higher viscosity.103 ThT is a popular dye because it yields a linear signal intensity relative to fibril concentration and does not alter fibril kinetics.103 However, ThT is sensitive to extreme pH values, and will bind to DNA, which might be falsely interpreted as fluorescence because of fibril presence.103 Although it is a timeless screening mechanism for tau, it might be best to conduct ThT in tandem with other diagnostic techniques. A similar fluorophore, Thioflavin S (ThS), can be used interchangeably with ThT as a fibril stain; however, ThS binds to different sites of the fibrils, illustrating similarities with Congo Red staining.104

Transmission electron microscopy

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is a frequently cited technique for directly visualizing tau fibrils with nanometer resolution.103 With TEM, the morphology, size, and prevalence of fibrils can be observed. Multiple photos of various parts of the sample can be secured, allowing users to find the most representative sector for publication. Before visualizing the sample, tau fibrils must first be placed onto a copper grid and negatively stained with a solution, such as uranyl acetate.105 Tau fibril structures viewed under TEM have a ‘fuzzy coat’, blurring their appearance.106 The largest downside to TEM is the high cost of machinery and retention of diagnostic staff. In addition, foreign particles or background noise can be mistaken for fibrils, especially to the untrained eye.

It is hoped that these screening methods will help identify fibrils and oligomers to allow for their inhibition and/or elimination.

Inhibition of p-tau aggregation

In the quest to identify effective strategies to treat AD, tau hyperphosphorylation represents a key pathological feature influencing tau aggregation and other pathological processes.107 Several approaches, such as kinase inhibitors and microtubule stabilizers, have been developed to modulate hyperphosphorylation of tau, although many of these were discontinued owing to their lack of efficacy or toxicity. However, other tau-targeted therapies, such as immunotherapy, have shown promising results in clinical trials.108

Considering the need for further innovation in the field of AD therapeutics, it is important to use p-tau as a target to identify lead molecules.109 Despite the development of many anti-aggregation agents of tau over the years, a consistent reliance on unmodified tau for screening compound libraries has been the usual strategy.109 In contrast to the hyperphosphorylated state of tau, which aggregates naturally, unmodified forms of tau require the presence of an external aggregating-inducing source, such as heparin.109–111 Although the method of aggregation might appear unimportant, studies have found that the aggregates induced artificially by heparin are different in structure from AD tau aggregates isolated from the AD brain.109 Therefore, the two types of aggregate will respond differently to therapeutics.

To obtain p-tau, one can isolate it from infected brain tissue, purify it from tau-overexpressed models, or even perform kinase reactions.109 Another way to produce p-tau is through Protein Interaction Modules-Assisted function X, also known as PIMAX.109 PIMAX is discussed by Liu et al, who used this novel procedure using Escherichia coli to produce the hyperphosphorylated form of tau.109 The p-tau isoform 1N4R obtained from PIMAX contained sites of phosphorylation linked to AD, validating its use for the subsequent screening of a vast library of compounds.109

In identifying anti-aggregate therapeutics, many studies have focused on Methylene Blue (MB), especially when using heparaninduced aggregates as a subject.109,112 As a well-known anti-aggregation agent, MB showed encouraging results in Phase II trials and AD animal models; however, it failed to deliver in Phase III.109,112 Soeda et al. showed that the actions of MB were limited to only NFT inhibition, without any influence on the toxic granular tau generation linked to atrophy and death of neurons.109,112 However, a derivative of MB, leuco-methylthioninium (LMTM), has been shown to be effective at preventing tau aggregation by isolating tau monomers from each other.113 The success of this drug as a therapeutic agent is uncertain, because results were promising in animal trials but insignificant in double-blind placebo trials with patients with AD.113 Therefore, it would be beneficial to consider the hyperphosphorylated form of tau to develop innovative drugs for the treatment of AD.109

In the aforementioned research by Liu et al., 1280 compounds from the Prestwick Chemical Library were screened to determine their p-tau-inhibition capabilities. Both aggregation and cytotoxicity assays were conducted. Two compounds were identified to have excellent inhibition properties: R-(-)-apomorphine and raloxifene.109 Both drugs demonstrated an ability to reduce the cytotoxicity of p-tau, cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), and promote cognitive function.109 Apomorphine, a drug administered subcutaneously to control symptoms of PD, prompted a sudden decrease in p-tau aggregate concentrations when tested at a 100 μM concentration via a ThS assay.109 Meanwhile, raloxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator used to combat osteoporosis, prompted a gradual decrease in p-tau aggregates at a 100 μM concentration.109 A third drug, idebenone, was identified as having excellent cytotoxic protection abilities, but unfortunately exhibited poor bioavailability and an inability to penetrate the BBB.109 Multiple drugs have been identified as promoters of p-tau aggregation, including benzodiazepines, which were shown to increase aggregation and cytotoxic effects via ThS.109 p-Tau for the screening comprised the isoform 1N4R with 16 available phosphorylated sites (obtained using PIMAX), with eight of the 16 being relevant to Braak staging.109

In another publication by Fortin et al., small molecules were prepared and tested for their α-synuclein and p-tau anti-aggregation capabilities. The molecules tested were proven to be cell permeable and nontoxic, serving as excellent candidates for tau amelioration therapeutics.114 This project involved the use of both ThT and PICUP assays, in addition to imaging via TEM. Two sulfonamide derivatives were identified to be promising inhibitors of p-tau.114 When analyzed via fluorescent assay, both compounds diminished p-tau fibrils, as determined by the reduced relative fluorescence intensity for the samples.114 When viewed via TEM, few fibrils were observed in samples incubated.114 Of the two promising molecules, compound 20 is most likely to cross the BBB because it had a low calculated partition coefficient, indicating a high ability to permeate this immunological barrier.114

A compound known as ACI-3024 has also entered the spotlight of potential tau inhibitors, yet there are no current publications detailing its efficacy.113 All information regarding ACI-3024 has been gleamed from conferences. The compound is suggested to disaggregate tau accumulations based on promising results in animal trials with Tg4510 mice.113 It is believed that ACI-3024 is being investigated in double-blind placebo trials.

Another approach to AD therapies is immunotherapy, which has shown immense promise in recent years.108 Bajracharya et al. noted the potential of RN2N IgG1 in eliminating tau tangles in the P301L mouse model.115 RN2N is an antibody that targets tau, whereas its respective immunoglobin isotype (found in mice) corresponds to IgG4 found in humans. RN2N IgG1 proved effective at removing tau build-up from amygdala and preserving microglia. During this study, a second IgG isotype, relating to human IgG1, was investigated. Unfortunately, because of successive toxic effects and increased AD-associated phenotypic behavior observed in RN2N IgG2a mice, the use of this isoform as a therapy for AD cannot be recommended.115 Therefore, care must be given when selecting a suitable immunoglobin isoform regarding tau therapies.

Li et al. provided another approach to antibody-related AD therapies, utilizing p-tau in hopes of identifying tau anti-aggregation agents.116 The team first identified a single-chain variable fragment antibody (scFv T1) through screening of a human scFv library with p-tau as an antigen.116 A subsequent ThT assay proved that the inhibitory scFv T1 antibody had a significant effect on the nucleation rate, but not the elongation rate, of fibrils.116 Such results confirmed the neuroprotective potential of scFv T1 to thwart oligomer formation through nucleation inhibition.116 More importantly, scFv T1 was also found to prevent the seeding of p-tau aggregates.116 An additional ThT assay was performed to determine the impact of scFv T1 on the conformational changes of p-tau. This second fluorescent assay found that scFv T1 protects p-tau from hydrophobic surface exposure resulting from conformational changes.116 Finally, Li et al. demonstrated that scFv T1 reduced p-tau aggregate-induced cytotoxicity in the eyes of transgenic hTauR406W Drosophila.116 With such promising results, scFv T1 could be a future treatment for AD and related tauopathies.

Concluding remarks

AD is a severe form of tauopathy affecting millions of individuals worldwide. Given that the functions of tau involve key processes in the brain, such as microtubule stabilization and aiding in transport across axons, its aberrant activity can lead to neuronal damage and cognitive loss. Significant limitations and clinical failures relating to Aβ-based therapies necessitate alternative approaches to tackle the disease. The involvement of p-tau in NFT formation opens new doors for AD drug discovery. One plausible strategy could be to gain insights from the post-translational changes, the spatiotemporal distribution of tau (and p-tau), and a special focus on oligomer (inhibition of early-stage aggregation). Another approach would be to understand the mechanisms by which p-tau enables the progression of AD by generating toxic oligomeric species. This can allow researchers to identify therapeutic tools, such as smallmolecule inhibitors, to circumvent the pathological burden that p-tau imposes and prevent the formation of NFTs.

Since the discovery of irregular phosphorylation of tau was first reported, a plethora of studies has focused on deciphering the damaging effects in the brains of patients with AD. One such area is p-tau, which is highly prone to form aggregates and oligomers. Oligomeric species of tau exhibit cytotoxicity rather than the aggregates comprising fibrils. Therefore, cutting-edge biophysical methods could aid the detection of monomers and oligomers, shedding light on the different stages of aggregation. In many clinical studies, p-tau has been used as a secondary target. The general tactic has been to inhibit the kinase or activate the phosphatase. However, these efforts lead to unwanted effects on substrates other than tau, which calls for a rethink of conventional approaches. Therefore, direct inhibition of p-tau aggregation is an additional approach to consider. This would hugely depend on successful exploration of the important sites at which p-tau aggregates to prevent the formation of toxic oligomers.

This review summarizes the most recent and promising advancements in the field of direct inhibition of p-tau aggregation. A detailed account of the burden of dementia and AD on the human population has been provided, followed by the limitations of amyloid-based therapies and their subsequent clinical failure. Background information regarding the structure, functions, and mechanisms of tau have been discussed. Recent reports of anti-aggregation compounds of tau and p-tau using small molecules, and/or natural products, and/or antibodies have also been described. The procuration of p-tau protein remains challenging. Consequently, few researchers have focused on the p-tau anti-aggregation approach. Thus, a rapid shift is required to move toward p-tau-targeting strategies and identify lead molecules to prevent the aggregation process. For example, to design small molecules targeting key concepts such as post-translational changes, stages of aggregation, and physicochemical parameters (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion), BBB permeability should be considered. A major hurdle in this area is the nature of the hyperphosphorylated state of tau, which undergoes rapid conformational variations and generation of repulsive forces, making it difficult to tackle with small molecules. Moreover, in-depth consideration of the spatial and temporal distribution of tau isoforms is pivotal to achieving selectivity and targeting only the pathologically relevant form. Although limited work has been done in this area, we are hopeful that this review will provide a strong foundation for the discovery and development of p-tau anti-aggregation therapeutics for the treatment of AD.

Acknowledgments

We would like to thank A.P. Saraswati for a portion of the bibliographic search. J.F. is supported by NIA NIH 1K08AG071985-01A1.

Kendall Moore

Kendall Moore is a senior majoring in animal sciences with a pre-veterinary concentration. She joined Jessica Fortin’s laboratory in September of 2021 as an undergraduate research assistant. Kendall hopes to receive her Doctor of Veterinary Medicine qualification and practice small animal or emergency medicine.

Jessica Fortin

Jessica Fortin is an assistant professor in the Basic Medical Sciences Department, Purdue University College of Veterinary Medicine. She was awarded a combined DVM-PhD degree from the Université de Montréal (2015), and a Masters with honors in medicinal chemistry (2008), a BSc in chemistry (2007) and pharmacy (BPharm, 2004) from the Université Laval. Dr Fortin completed training in veterinary anatomic pathology in 2018 at the University of Missouri. She has several years of experience in medicinal chemistry and molecular pharmacology. Her research program focuses on drug discovery for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Figure 1. Statistical representation of the prevalence and prediction of dementia worldwide from 2017 to 2050. The y-axis represents the number of patients diagnosed with dementia in millions of people. The x-axis depicts four separate years of census; years 2015 and 2022 have recorded data, whereas years 2030 and 2050 are predictions based on information from WHO. The incidence of dementia is expected to increase nearly threefold by 2050 compared with 2015, as a result of an everincreasing aging population.

Figure 2. Structure of tau protein and its domain organization. MAPT encodes six unique isoforms: isoforms with three repeating sites (pink) are depicted to the left, and isoforms with four repeating sites are on the right. The isoforms appear from top to bottom in order of length (number of amino acids), which is dictated by the number of N-domain sites (purple). Each isoform contains one proline-rich domain (green) and one C-terminal site (blue), which flank the repeating sites.

Figure 3. Tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation. The stabilized microtubule, represented in purple and teal, will inherently carry tau protein monomers (yellow circles). As phosphate molecules (pink letter ‘P’) approach, they bind to the tau protein in a process known as phosphorylation. The resulting hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) leads to destabilization of the microtubule. Following this step, p-tau monomers accumulate to form oligomers, which further congregate to form paired helical filaments (PHFs). These PHFs can be imagined as forming a patchwork to create neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). These NFTs, located within the soma of affected neurons, are suspected to be the pathological feature of Alzheimer’s disease.

Figure 4. One proposed theory for tau seeding and spreading via trans-synaptic transmission (among other possible routes). The large blue shapes represent neurons, whereas the pink circles are tau seeds. The flow of seeding is downwards in this figure. First, tau protein fibrils disassemble into individual seeds, which are expelled into the synaptic gap between neurons. The tau seeds can be free-floating or encased in a vesicle (depicted by a gray ring). As these tau seeds encounter another neuron, the neuron uptakes the tau, where they are strung together in a process known as seeding. Following this step, fibril growth can take place in the newly infected neuron. This diagram explains the spread of neurodegeneration through the brain at a molecular level.

Figure 5. Therapeutic strategies targeting tau for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. These are six possibilities for disrupting the formation of tau aggregate. (1) Prevent tau phosphorylation and subsequent destabilization of the microtubule by prohibiting phosphate molecules from attaching to the tau protein monomers. (2) Stabilize microtubules, even with the presence of phosphorylated tau (p-tau) on the surface of the microtubule. (3) Clear p-tau to the extracellular space to move it away from the microtubule, ideally reverting destabilization. (4) Degradation of p-tau oligomers to prevent subsequent formation into higher-level aggregates. (5) Prevention of p-tau aggregation to prohibit formation of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) within neurons. This step can occur either before the creation of paired helical filaments (PHFs) or before the accumulation of NFTs. (6) Prevention of intercellular tau transfer and uptake to prevent neurons from being affected through the process of seeding.

Highlights:

Dementia involves the chronic and progressive deterioration of cognitive functions.

Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia.

Abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau (p-tau) is implicated in the pathogenesis of AD.

Abrogating p-tau aggregation may lead to the reduction of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs).

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

Declaration of interests

None declared by authors.


References

1 Lopez A , Lee SE , Wojta K , Ramos EM , Klein E , Chen J , A152T tau allele causes neurodegeneration that can be ameliorated in a zebrafish model by autophagy induction. Brain. 2017; 140 : 1128–1146.28334843
2 Pandey UB , Nichols CD . Human disease models in Drosophila melanogaster and the role of the fly in therapeutic drug discovery. Pharmacol Rev. 2011; 63 : 411–436.21415126
3 Gistelinck M , Lambert JC , Callaerts P , Dermaut B , Dourlen P . Drosophila models of tauopathies: what have we learned? Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2012; 2012 : 970980.22701808
4 WHO. Global Action Plan on the Public Health Response to Dementia 2017–2025. Geneva; WHO: 2017.
5 NIA. Alzheimer’s Disease Fact Sheet. www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers-disease-fact-sheet [Accessed 3 January 2023].
6 Dawson TM , Golde TE , Lagier-Tourenne C . Animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Neurosci. 2018; 21 : 1370–1379.30250265
7 Knopman DS , Amieva H , Petersen RC , Chételat G , Holtzman DM , Hyman BT , Alzheimer disease. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2021; 7 : 33.33986301
8 Chen GF , Xu TH , Yan Y , Zhou Y-R , Jiang Y , Melcher K , Amyloid beta: structure, biology and structure-based therapeutic development. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2017; 38 : 1205–1235.28713158
9 Braak H , Braak E . Neuropathological stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. Acta Neuropathol. 1991; 82 : 239–259.1759558
10 Iannucci J , Johnson SL , Majchrzak M , Barlock BJ , Akhlaghi F , Seeram NP , Short-term treatment with dabigatran alters protein expression patterns in a latestage tau-based Alzheimer’s disease mouse model. Biochem Biophys Rep. 2020; 24 : 100862.33294639
11 Barten DM , Cadelina GW , Hoque N , DeCarr LB , Guss VL , Yang L , Tau transgenic mice as models for cerebrospinal fluid tau biomarkers. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011; 24 : 127–141.21422517
12 Avila J . Microtubule functions. Life Sci. 1992; 50 : 327–334.1732704
13 Weydt P , Dupuis L , Petersen A . Thermoregulatory disorders in Huntington disease. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018; 157 : 761–775.30459039
14 Park S , Lee JH , Jeon JH , Lee MJ . Degradation or aggregation: the ramifications of post-translational modifications on tau. BMB Rep. 2018; 51 : 265–273.29661268
15 Morris M , Maeda S , Vossel K , Mucke L . The many faces of tau. Neuron. 2011; 70 : 410–426.21555069
16 Wei ML , Andreadis A . Splicing of a regulated exon reveals additional complexity in the axonal microtubule-associated protein tau. J Neurochem. 1998; 70 : 1346–1356.9523550
17 Sealey MA , Vourkou E , Cowan CM , Bossing T , Quraishe S , Grammenoudi S , Distinct phenotypes of three-repeat and four-repeat human tau in a transgenic model of tauopathy. Neurobiol Dis. 2017; 105 : 74–83.28502805
18 Andreadis A . Tau gene alternative splicing: expression patterns, regulation and modulation of function in normal brain and neurodegenerative diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005; 1739 : 91–103.15615629
19 Bolós M , Llorens-Martín M , Jurado-Arjona J , Hernández F , Rábano A , Avila J . Direct evidence of internalization of tau by microglia in vitro and in vivo. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016; 50 : 77–87.26638867
20 Wesseling H , Mair W , Kumar M , Schlaffner CN , Tang S , Beerepoot P , Tau PTM profiles identify patient heterogeneity and stages of Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. 2020; 183 : 1699–1713.33188775
21 Goedert M , Spillantini MG , Jakes R , Rutherford D , Crowther RA . Multiple isoforms of human microtubule-associated protein tau: sequences and localization in neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 1989; 3 : 519–526.2484340
22 Spillantini MG , Goedert M . Tau pathology and neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 2013; 12 : 609–622.23684085
23 Goedert M , Spillantini MG , Cairns NJ , Crowther RA . Tau proteins of Alzheimer paired helical filaments: abnormal phosphorylation of all six brain isoforms. Neuron. 1992; 8 : 159–168.1530909
24 Smolek T , Jadhav S , Brezovakova V , Cubinkova V , Valachova B , Novak P , First-in-rat study of human Alzheimer’s disease tau propagation. Mol Neurobiol. 2019; 56 : 621–631.29770957
25 Jeganathan S , von Bergen M , Mandelkow EM , Mandelkow E . The natively unfolded character of tau and its aggregation to Alzheimer-like paired helical filaments. Biochemistry. 2008; 47 : 10526–10539.18783251
26 Chu D , Liu F . Pathological changes of tau related to Alzheimer’s disease. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2019; 10 : 931–944.30346708
27 Alonso AD , Cohen LS , Corbo C , Morozova V , Elldrissi A , Phillips G , Hyperphosphorylation of tau associates with changes in its function beyond microtubule stability. Front Cell Neurosci. 2018; 12 : 338.30356756
28 Alquezar C , Arya S , Kao AW . Tau post-translational modifications: dynamic transformers of tau function, degradation, and aggregation. Front Neurol. 2020; 11 : 595532.33488497
29 Arakhamia T , Lee CE , Carlomagno Y , Kumar M , Duong DM , Wesseling H , Posttranslational modifications mediate the structural diversity of tauopathy strains. Cell. 2021; 184 : 6207–6210.34890553
30 Acosta DM , Mancinelli C , Bracken C , Eliezer D . Post-translational modifications within tau paired helical filament nucleating motifs perturb microtubule interactions and oligomer formation. J Biol Chem. 2022; 298 : 101442.34838590
31 Ercan-Herbst E , Ehrig J , Schondorf DC , Behrendt A , Klaus B , Ramos BG , A post-translational modification signature defines changes in soluble tau correlating with oligomerization in early stage Alzheimer’s disease brain. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2019; 7 : 192.31796124
32 Wegmann S , Biernat J , Mandelkow E . A current view on tau protein phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2021; 69 : 131–138.33892381
33 Medina M , Avila J . Further understanding of tau phosphorylation: implications for therapy. Expert Rev Neurother. 2015; 15 : 115–122.25555397
34 Wang Y , Mandelkow E . Tau in physiology and pathology. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2016; 17 : 5–21.26631930
35 Johnson GV , Stoothoff WH . Tau phosphorylation in neuronal cell function and dysfunction. J Cell Sci. 2004; 117 : 5721–5729.15537830
36 Lim S , Haque MM , Kim D , Kim DJ , Kim YK . Cell-based models to investigate tau aggregation. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2014; 12 : 7–13.25505502
37 Mandelkow E , Von Bergen M , Biernat J , Mandelkow E-M . Structural principles of tau and the paired helical filaments of Alzheimer’s disease. 2007; 17 : 83–90.
38 Köpke E , Tung YC , Shaikh S , Alonso AC , Iqbal K , Grundke-Iqbal I . Microtubule-associated protein tau. Abnormal phosphorylation of a non-paired helical filament pool in Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem. 1993; 268 : 24374–24384.8226987
39 Brundin P , Melki R , Kopito R . Prion-like transmission of protein aggregates in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2010; 11 : 301–307.20308987
40 Ward SM , Himmelstein DS , Lancia JK , Binder LI . Tau oligomers and tau toxicity in neurodegenerative disease. Biochem Soc Trans. 2012; 40 : 667–671.22817713
41 Lee HG , Perry G , Moreira PI , Garrett MR , Liu Q , Zhu X , Tau phosphorylation in Alzheimer’s disease: pathogen or protector? Trends Mol Med. 2005; 11 : 164–169.15823754
42 Shafiei SS , Guerrero-Munoz MJ , Castillo-Carranza DL . Tau oligomers: cytotoxicity, propagation, and mitochondrial damage. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017; 9 : 83.28420982
43 Lasagna-Reeves CA , Castillo-Carranza DL , Sengupta U , Guerrero-Munoz MJ , Kiritoshi T , Neugebauer V , Alzheimer brain-derived tau oligomers propagate pathology from endogenous tau. Sci Rep. 2012; 2 : 700.23050084
44 Gyparaki MT , Arab A , Sorokina EM , Santiago-Ruiz AN , Bohrer CH , Xiao J , Tau forms oligomeric complexes on microtubules that are distinct from tau aggregates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021; 118 : e2021461118.33952699
45 Lo Cascio F , Puangmalai N , Ellsworth A , Bucchieri F , Pace A , Piccionello AP , Toxic tau oligomers modulated by novel curcumin derivatives. Sci Rep. 2019; 9 : 19011.31831807
46 Ghag G , Bhatt N , Cantu DV , Guerrero-Munoz MJ , Ellsworth A , Sengupta U , Soluble tau aggregates, not large fibrils, are the toxic species that display seeding and cross-seeding behavior. Protein Sci. 2018; 27 : 1901–1909.30125425
47 Cowan CM , Quraishe S , Hands S , Sealey M , Mahajan S , Allan DW , Rescue from tau-induced neuronal dysfunction produces insoluble tau oligomers. Sci Rep. 2015; 5 : 17191.26608845
48 Ren Y , Sahara N . Characteristics of tau oligomers. Front Neurol. 2013; 4 : 102.23882258
49 Clavaguera F , Bolmont T , Crowther RA , Abramowski D , Frank S , Probst A , Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in transgenic mouse brain. Nat Cell Biol. 2009; 11 : 909–913.19503072
50 DeVos SL , Corjuc BT , Oakley DH , Nobuhara CK , Bannon RN , Chase A , Synaptic tau seeding precedes tau pathology in human Alzheimer’s disease brain. Front Neurosci. 2018; 12 : 267.29740275
51 Hernandez F , Avila J . Tauopathies. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2007; 64 : 2219–2233.17604998
52 Murray ME , Lowe VJ , Graff-Radford NR , Liesinger AM , Cannon A , Przybelski SA , Clinicopathologic and 11C-Pittsburgh compound B implications of Thal amyloid phase across the Alzheimer’s disease spectrum. Brain. 2015; 138 : 1370–1381.25805643
53 Bejanin A , Schonhaut DR , La Joie R , Kramer JH , Baker SL , Sosa N , Tau pathology and neurodegeneration contribute to cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2017; 140 : 3286–3300.29053874
54 Cummings J , Lee G , Mortsdorf T , Ritter A , Zhong K . Alzheimer’s disease drug development pipeline: 2017. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2017; 3 : 367–384.29067343
55 Muralidar S , Ambi SV , Sekaran S , Thirumalai D , Palaniappan B . Role of tau protein in Alzheimer’s disease: the prime pathological player. Int J Biol Macromol. 2020; 163 : 1599–1617.32784025
56 Mehta D , Jackson R , Paul G , Shi J , Sabbagh M . Why do trials for Alzheimer’s disease drugs keep failing? A discontinued drug perspective for 2010–2015. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2017; 26 : 735–739.
57 Hickman S , Izzy S , Sen P , Morsett L , El Khoury J . Microglia in neurodegeneration. Nat Neurosci. 2018; 21 : 1359–1369.30258234
58 Lasagna-Reeves CA , Castillo-Carranza DL , Sengupta U , Clos AL , Jackson GR , Kayed R . Tau oligomers impair memory and induce synaptic and mitochondrial dysfunction in wild-type mice. Mol Neurodegener. 2011; 6 : 39.21645391
59 Niewiadomska G , Niewiadomski W , Steczkowska M , Gasiorowska A . Tau oligomers neurotoxicity. Life (Basel). 2021; 11 : 28.33418848
60 Tiernan CT , Mufson EJ , Kanaan NM , Counts SE . Tau oligomer pathology in nucleus basalis neurons during the progression of Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2018; 77 : 246–259.29378005
61 Braak H , Alafuzoff I , Arzberger T , Kretzschmar H , Del Tredici K . Staging of Alzheimer disease-associated neurofibrillary pathology using paraffin sections and immunocytochemistry. Acta Neuropathol. 2006; 112 : 389–404.16906426
62 Arriagada PV , Growdon JH , Hedley-Whyte ET , Hyman BT . Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer’s disease. 1992; 42 : 631–631.1549228
63 Giacobini E , Gold G . Alzheimer disease therapy—moving from amyloid-β to tau. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013; 9 : 677–686.24217510
64 Boche D , Denham N , Holmes C , Nicoll JA . Neuropathology after active Abeta42 immunotherapy: implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol. 2010; 120 : 369–384.20632020
65 Gold G , Kövari E , Corte G , Herrmann FR , Canuto A , Bussière T , Clinical validity of Aß-protein deposition staging in brain aging and Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exper Neurol. 2001; 60 : 946–952.11589425
66 Giong H-K , Subramanian M , Yu K , Lee J-S . Non-rodent genetic animal models for studying tauopathy: review of Drosophila, zebrafish, and C. elegans models. 2021; 22 : 8465.
67 Dujardin S , Colin M , Buée L . Invited review: animal models of tauopathies and their implications for research/translation into the clinic. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2015; 41 : 59–80.25428793
68 Subramanian M , Hyeon SJ , Das T , Suh YS , Kim YK , Lee J-S , UBE4B, a microRNA-9 target gene, promotes autophagy–mediated tau degradation. Nat Commun. 2021; 12 : 3291.34078905
69 Zon LI , Peterson RT . In vivo drug discovery in the zebrafish. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2005; 4 : 35–44.15688071
70 Paquet D , Bhat R , Sydow A , Mandelkow E-M , Berg S , Hellberg S , A zebrafish model of tauopathy allows in vivo imaging of neuronal cell death and drug evaluation. J Clin Invest. 2009; 119 : 1382–1395.19363289
71 Ward S , Carrel JS . Fertilization and sperm competition in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev Biol. 1979; 73 : 304–321.499670
72 Kim W , Underwood RS , Greenwald I , Shaye DD . OrthoList 2: a new comparative genomic analysis of human and Caenorhabditis elegans genes. Genetics. 2018; 210 : 445–461.30120140
73 Berkowitz LA , Knight AL , Caldwell GA , Caldwell KA . Generation of stable transgenic C. elegans using microinjection. J Vis Exp. 2008; 18 : 833.
74 Brandt R , Gergou A , Wacker I , Fath T , Hutter H . A Caenorhabditis elegans model of tau hyperphosphorylation: Induction of developmental defects by transgenic overexpression of Alzheimer’s disease-like modified tau. Neurobiol Aging. 2009; 30 : 22–33.17590239
75 Kraemer BC , Zhang B , Leverenz JB , Thomas JH , Trojanowski JQ , Schellenberg GD . Neurodegeneration and defective neurotransmission in a Caenorhabditis elegans model of tauopathy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 100 : 9980–9985.12872001
76 Song Y , Brady ST . Analysis of microtubules in isolated axoplasm from the squid giant axon. Methods Cell Biol. 2013; 115 : 125–137.23973070
77 Moreno H , Choi S , Yu E , Brusco J , Avila J , Moreira JE , Blocking effects of human tau on squid giant synapse transmission and its prevention by T-817 MA. Front Synaptic Neurosci. 2011; 3 : 3.21629767
78 Patterson KR , Ward SM , Combs B , Voss K , Kanaan NM , Morfini G , Heat shock protein 70 prevents both tau aggregation and the inhibitory effects of preexisting tau aggregates on fast axonal transport. Biochemistry. 2011; 50 : 10300–10310.22039833
79 Hanes J , Zilka N , Bartkova M , Caletkova M , Dobrota D , Novak M . Rat tau proteome consists of six tau isoforms: implication for animal models of human tauopathies. J Neurochem. 2009; 108 : 1167–1176.19141083
80 Maruyama M , Shimada H , Suhara T , Shinotoh H , Ji B , Maeda J , Imaging of tau pathology in a tauopathy mouse model and in Alzheimer patients compared to normal controls. Neuron. 2013; 79 : 1094–1108.24050400
81 de Calignon A , Polydoro M , Suarez-Calvet M , William C , Adamowicz DH , Kopeikina KJ , Propagation of tau pathology in a model of early Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron. 2012; 73 : 685–697.22365544
82 Narasimhan S , Changolkar L , Riddle DM , Kats A , Stieber A , Weitzman SA , Human tau pathology transmits glial tau aggregates in the absence of neuronal tau. J Exp Med. 2020; 217 : e20190783.31826239
83 He Z , McBride JD , Xu H , Changolkar L , Kim S-J , Zhang B , Transmission of tauopathy strains is independent of their isoform composition. Nat Commun. 2020; 11 : 7.31911587
84 He Z , Guo JL , McBride JD , Narasimhan S , Kim H , Changolkar L , Amyloid-beta plaques enhance Alzheimer’s brain tau-seeded pathologies by facilitating neuritic plaque tau aggregation. Nat Med. 2018; 24 : 29–38.29200205
85 Guo JL , Lee VM . Cell-to-cell transmission of pathogenic proteins in neurodegenerative diseases. Nat Med. 2014; 20 : 130–138.24504409
86 Buee L , Bussiere T , Buee-Scherrer V , Delacourte A , Hof PR . Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2000; 33 : 95–130.10967355
87 Frost B , Jacks RL , Diamond MI . Propagation of tau misfolding from the outside to the inside of a cell. J Biol Chem. 2009; 284 : 12845–12852.19282288
88 Wu JW , Hussaini SA , Bastille IM , Rodriguez GA , Mrejeru A , Rilett K , Neuronal activity enhances tau propagation and tau pathology in vivo. Nat Neurosci. 2016; 19 : 1085–1092.27322420
89 Wegmann S , Maury EA , Kirk MJ , Sagran L , Roe A , DeVos SL , Removing endogenous tau does not prevent tau propagation yet reduces its neurotoxicity. EMBO J. 2015; 34 : 3028–3041.26538322
90 McMillan P , Korvatska E , Poorkaj P , Evstafjeva Z , Robinson L , Greenup L , Tau isoform regulation is region- and cell-specific in mouse brain. J Comp Neurol. 2008; 511 : 788–803.18925637
91 Yoshiyama Y , Higuchi M , Zhang B , Huang S-M , Iwata N , Saido TC , Synapse loss and microglial activation precede tangles in a P301S tauopathy mouse model. Neuron. 2007; 53 : 337–351.17270732
92 Cook C , Dunmore JH , Murray ME , Scheffel K , Shukoor N , Tong J , Severe amygdala dysfunction in a MAPT transgenic mouse model of frontotemporal dementia. Neurobiol Aging. 2014; 35 : 1769–1777.24503275
93 Liu L , Drouet V , Wu JW , Witter MP , Small SA , Clelland C , Trans-synaptic spread of tau pathology in vivo. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7 : e31302.22312444
94 Santacruz K , Lewis J , Spires T , Paulson J , Kotilinek L , Ingelsson M , Tau suppression in a neurodegenerative mouse model improves memory function. Science. 2005; 309 : 476–481.16020737
95 Roussarie JP , Yao V , Rodriguez-Rodriguez P , Oughtred R , Rust J , Plautz Z , Selective neuronal vulnerability in Alzheimer’s disease: a network-based analysis. Neuron. 2020; 107 : 821–835.32603655
96 Andorfer C , Kress Y , Espinoza M , de Silva R , Tucker KL , Barde Y-A , Hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of tau in mice expressing normal human tau isoforms. J Neurochem. 2003; 86 : 582–590.12859672
97 Mahmood T , Yang PC . Western blot: technique, theory, and trouble shooting. N Am J Med Sci. 2012; 4 : 429–434.23050259
98 Sengupta U , Portelius E , Hansson O , Farmer K , Castillo-Carranza D , Woltjer R , Tau oligomers in cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2017; 4 : 226–235.28382304
99 Gerson JE , Sengupta U , Kayed R . Tau oligomers as pathogenic seeds: preparation and propagation in vitro and in vivo. Methods Mol Biol. 2017; 1523 : 141–157.27975249
100 Younan ND , Viles JH . A comparison of three fluorophores for the detection of amyloid fibers and prefibrillar oligomeric assemblies. ThT (Thioflavin T); ANS (1Anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic Acid); and bisANS (4,4 ‘-Dianilino-1,1 ‘-binaphthyl-5,5 ‘-disulfonic Acid). Biochemistry. 2015; 54 : 4297–4306.26087242
101 Bitan G . Structural study of metastable amyloidogenic protein oligomers by photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins. Methods Enzymol. 2006; 413 : 217–236.17046399
102 Rahimi F , Maiti P , Bitan G . Photo-induced cross-linking of unmodified proteins (PICUP) applied to amyloidogenic peptides. J Vis Exp. 2009; (23 ): 1071.19229175
103 Gade Malmos K , Blancas-Mejia LM , Weber B , Buchner J , Ramirez-Alvarado M , Naiki H , ThT 101: a primer on the use of thioflavin T to investigate amyloid formation. Amyloid. 2017; 24 : 1–16.
104 Wei J , Wu C , Lankin D , Gulrati A , Valyi-Nagy T , Cochran E , Development of novel amyloid imaging agents based upon thioflavin S. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2005; 2 : 109–114.15974905
105 Xu S , Brunden KR , Trojanowski JQ , Lee VM . Characterization of tau fibrillization in vitro. Alzheimers Dement. 2010; 6 : 110–117.20298971
106 Goldsbury C , Baxa U , Simon MN , Steven AC , Engel A , Wall JS , Amyloid structure and assembly: insights from scanning transmission electron microscopy. J Struct Biol. 2011; 173 : 1–13.20868754
107 Gong CX , Iqbal K . Hyperphosphorylation of microtubule-associated protein tau: a promising therapeutic target for Alzheimer disease. Curr Med Chem. 2008; 15 : 2321–2328.18855662
108 Soeda Y , Takashima A . New insights into drug discovery targeting tau protein. Front Mol Neurosci. 2020; 13 : 590896.33343298
109 Liu M , Dexheimer T , Sui D , Hovde S , Deng X , Kwok R , Hyperphosphorylated tau aggregation and cytotoxicity modulators screen identified prescription drugs linked to Alzheimer’s disease and cognitive functions. Sci Rep. 2020; 10 : 16551.33024171
110 Alonso A , Zaidi T , Novak M , Grundke-Iqbal I , Iqbal K . Hyperphosphorylation induces self-assembly of tau into tangles of paired helical filaments/straight filaments. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001; 98 : 6923–6928.11381127
111 Pérez M , Valpuesta JM , Medina M , Montejo de Garcini E , Avila J . Polymerization of τ into filaments in the presence of heparin: the minimal sequence required for τ - τ interaction. 1996; 67 : 1183–1190.
112 Soeda Y , Saito M , Maeda S , Ishida K , Nakamura A , Kojima S , Methylene blue inhibits formation of tau fibrils but not of granular tau oligomers: a plausible key to understanding failure of a clinical trial for Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis. 2019; 68 : 1677–1686.30909223
113 Imbimbo BP , Ippati S , Watling M , Balducci C . A critical appraisal of tau-targeting therapies for primary and secondary tauopathies. Alzheimers Dement. 2022; 18 : 1008–1037.34533272
114 Fortin JS , Shimanaka K , Saraswati AP , Liu M , Wang K-W , Hagar H-T , Anti-fibrillization effects of sulfonamide derivatives on alpha–synuclein and hyperphosphorylated tau isoform 1N4R. J Mol Struct. 2022; 1267 : 133574.36310922
115 Bajracharya R , Brici D , Bodea LG , Janowicz PW , Gotz J , Nisbet RM . Tau antibody isotype induces differential effects following passive immunisation of tau transgenic mice. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2021; 9 : 42.33712083
116 Li S , Yi Y , Cui K , Zhang Y , Chen Y , Han D , A Single-chain variable fragment antibody inhibits aggregation of phosphorylated tau and ameliorates tau toxicity in vitro and in vivo. J Alzheimers Dis. 2021; 79 : 1613–1629.33459708
