LICENSE: This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.


101139138
30141
DNA Repair (Amst)
DNA Repair (Amst)
DNA repair
1568-7864
1568-7856

36148701
9844216
10.1016/j.dnarep.2022.103406
NIHMS1854515
Article
Genome Integrity and Inflammation in the Nervous System
Aditi
McKinnon Peter J.
Center for Pediatric Neurological Disease Research, St. Jude Pediatric Translational Neuroscience Initiative, Dept. Cell &amp; Mol. Biology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. 38105
Author statement.

All authors have seen and approve this manuscript.

Correspondence: peter.mckinnon@stjude.org
11 1 2023
11 2022
14 9 2022
01 11 2023
119 103406103406
This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.
Preservation of genomic integrity is crucial for nervous system development and function. DNA repair deficiency results in several human diseases that are characterized by both neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation. Recent research has highlighted a role for compromised genomic integrity as a key factor driving neuropathology and triggering innate immune signaling to cause inflammation. Here we review the mechanisms by which DNA damage engages innate immune signaling and how this may promote neurological disease. We also consider the contributions of different neural cell types towards DNA damage-driven neuroinflammation. A deeper knowledge of genome maintenance mechanisms that prevent aberrant immune activation in neural cells will guide future therapies to ameliorate neurological disease.


pmc1 Introduction.

Living organisms maintain homeostasis by employing various strategies to detect, repair and respond to internal and external damage. An array of DNA damage response (DDR) pathways has evolved to protect the genome from various genotoxic agents. Likewise, the immune system senses stress and provides protection against infectious agents and tissue damage. Considerable crosstalk exists between DNA repair and the immune system. For instance, the adaptive immune system employs DNA repair machinery for the generation of immune cell diversity through V(D)J recombination and immunoglobulin class switch recombination [1, 2]. The DDR also triggers immune signaling through induction of many cell surface ligands that are detected by immune cells [3-6]. Over the last decade, several components of the innate immune system have identified that sense microbial or endogenous damaged DNA and initiate downstream signaling [7-10]. It is becoming increasingly clear that the interaction between the immune system and the DDR is tightly regulated to prevent excessive inflammatory response; its dysregulation leads to various inflammation-associated human disorders including, various neurological and age-related neurodegeneration.

Inflammation is an adaptive response to disrupted tissue homeostasis, including injury and infection, and its role is to clear pathogens or damaged tissues. This response involves interactions between various cell types, recruitment of immune cells, and release of inflammatory mediators. A controlled inflammatory response is beneficial to a host and allows it to repair damage and restores its original state. Conversely, uncontrolled persistent inflammation, is detrimental [11]. Notably, chronic neuroinflammation is widely recognized as an early pathological event in the majority, if not all, neurological diseases [12, 13]. The central nervous system (CNS) was once considered an immune privileged site. However, the nervous system interacts with immune cells to maintain homeostasis as many CNS cells express receptors for immune cells. Under physiological conditions, immune surveillance of CNS is closely monitored, while neuroimmune interactions are often altered in pathological conditions [14-16].

The sources and molecular mechanisms underlying inflammation in the brain remain unclear. DNA damage is now realized as a lesion that is capable of inducing inflammation. DNA species generated as a result of DNA damage, replication byproducts or retrotransposons are recognized by innate immune DNA sensors resulting in induction of an inflammatory signaling cascade [10, 17-22]. The link between inadequate DNA repair and neurological diseases is well known [23, 24], but why the nervous system is particularly susceptible to DNA damage is unclear. Genomic instability arising from DNA repair deficiency can compromise tissue and cell integrity and initiate an inflammatory response. Thus, it is likely that as a corollary to inadequate DNA repair, DNA damage-induced inflammation is a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of many human neurological diseases (Table 1). In this review, we discuss connections between DNA damage and neuroinflammation and neurological disease.

2 The Neural DNA Damage Response.

The nervous system controls cognition, movement, multiple senses, and emotions. Numerous neuronal and glial cell types populate the nervous system. Broadly, neurons are considered functional unit of the nervous system that store and transmit information, while glia provide a framework to support neuronal functions. Various human congenital disorders that result from mutations in DNA repair genes and studies using mouse models indicate that the neural genome is particularly susceptible to endogenous DNA damage. Multiple endogenous DNA lesions occur in the nervous system, but it remains unclear why certain cell types are more prone to DNA repair defects [25-31].

While genome stability is particularly critical for nervous system function, it is nonetheless mediated by an interconnected network of DNA repair pathways found ubiquitously throughout other tissues of the body. These multiple biochemically distinct DNA repair pathways have been reviewed extensively; Base excision repair [32, 33], Nucleotide excision repair [34, 35], Mismatch repair pathway [36], Ribonucleotide excision repair removes ribonucleotides via the RNaseH2 complex [37-39] and DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are repaired by two types of pathways, homologous recombination and non-homologous end-joining [40, 41]. Thus, these pathways collectively prevent the accumulation of a broad range of deleterious DNA modifications that could impact cellular functions.

The requirement for specific DNA repair pathways is largely dependent upon the stages of nervous system development. For example, during neurogenesis, neuronal progenitor and stem cells divide to expand the pool of progenitor cells. At this stage, replication stress is the predominant type of endogenous lesion [42, 43]. DNA repair is critical during neurogenesis as exemplified by DNA repair-associated neurological diseases that present during early childhood, indicating that DNA damage impacts nervous system development [24, 44]. Although mature neurons do not divide, they do experience a barrage of DNA lesions. The brain has high oxidative metabolic demand and therefore oxidant species may be a major type of DNA damage causing DNA breaks and transcription disruption [45, 46].

The DDR detects DNA damage and orchestrates downstream signaling to repair DNA damage and mount an appropriate biological response including cell cycle arrest, apoptosis or senescence. In the nervous system, members of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like protein kinase (PIKKs) family; ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM), ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related protein (ATR), and the catalytic subunit of the DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PKcs) are central responders to DNA damage [47]. ATM and DNA-PK activation is via DSBs, while ATR is activated by the presence of RPA bound ssDNA and stalled replication forks [48]. Following their activation, a diverse set of mediator proteins are phosphorylated by these kinases [49-51]. The mediators further amplify the response by either phosphorylating or recruiting various effector molecules. For example, phosphorylation of CHK1 and CHK2 by ATR and ATM, respectively regulates cell cycle checkpoints by modulating CDK activity [52-56].

3 DNA damage-driven inflammation.

Engagement of the DNA repair machinery in response to DNA damage typically leads to either transient growth arrest, apoptosis or senescence. However, accumulating evidence suggests that compromised genomic integrity triggers inflammation in addition to these cellular outcomes (Figure 1). The following discusses various inducers of DNA damage-driven inflammation.

3.1 DNA damage-driven genomic instability and inflammation.

That DNA is immuno-stimulatory was first reported around 50 years ago, when it was shown that foreign nucleic acid triggers an interferon response in chick and mouse cells [57]. However, since genomic DNA is compartmentalized inside the nucleus, it was widely believed that self-DNA is protected from immune sensing. Notably, research in the last decade has challenged this paradigm and suggests that self-DNA generated because of DNA damage could engage immune signaling [10, 17-22]. Early evidence of DNA damage induced immune signaling came from human cells treated with etoposide that led to the induction of interferons [22]. Subsequent studies showed that DNA damage leads to accumulation of DNA in the cytoplasm, thereby triggering detection by cytoplasmic DNA sensors and innate immune signaling [18-21, 58]. For example, in various human cancer cell lines, single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and dsDNA were found to constitutively localize in the cytoplasm. Treatment of cells with exogenous DNA damaging agents such as ionizing radiation or replication inhibitors, further increased the accumulation of these DNA species in the cytoplasm [21, 58]. Interestingly, depletion of the Bloom syndrome helicase or exonuclease 1 dramatically reduced cytoplasmic ssDNA accumulation in cells, suggesting a role of DSB end resection factors in generating these fragments [21]. Although the exact nature of these DNA fragments is not known, cloning of cytosolic DNA species accumulated after genotoxic agents suggests that these are derived from retroelements and form non-B DNA structures [58]. Importantly, these cytosolic DNA fragments induced type I interferon signaling [18, 20, 21, 58].

Pertinent to understanding the inflammatory role of DNA is knowing how DNA accumulates in the cytoplasm upon DNA damage. Micronuclei formation is one of the mechanisms that links self-DNA recognition to immune activation [59-61]. Micronuclei are small nuclear envelope bound extra-nuclear structures that arise during cell division when genome integrity is compromised. Micronuclei consist of chromosome fragments or whole chromosome(s) that lag behind during anaphase, as a result of unresolved genomic lesions [62]. Since their formation is strongly linked with genomic instability, they are often used as a sensitive marker to measure genotoxicity [63]. Although micronuclei are surrounded by the nuclear envelope, they lack key proteins required for the nuclear envelope and genomic integrity. This results in frequent and irreversible rupture of micronuclei nuclear lamina, leading to chromosome fragmentation and chromothripsis [64-67]. Studies have shown that the micronuclei nuclear envelope dissolution also exposes self-DNA into the cytoplasm, which is detected by cytosolic DNA sensors leading to activation of type I interferon signaling in the micronucleated cell [18, 59-61, 68, 69].

Additional evidence for DNA damage-mediated cytoplasmic DNA accumulation came from mouse models involving TREX1 and DNase II. TREX1 is a ubiquitously expressed cytoplasmic 3–5’exonuclease [70], while DNase II is a lysosomal DNase [71]. Mutations in TREX1 and DNASE2 in humans leads to autoimmune disease and activation of type I interferon signaling [72, 73]. Likewise, Trex1−/− and Dnase2−/− mice exhibit severe inflammation in a STING (Stimulator of Interferon Genes)-dependent manner [74-79]. Accumulation of damaged DNA in the cytoplasm of nuclease-depleted cells has also been shown [75, 80, 81]. Thus, these two models of DNase deficiency further demonstrate that cytoplasmic self-DNA can be immunogenic.

3.2 DNA damage-driven senescence and inflammation.

Senescence is a state where cells exit the cell cycle irreversibly and enter permanent growth arrest without undergoing cell death [82]. Senescence results in many phenotypic changes in a cell including, chromatin reorganization, metabolic and transcriptional alterations. The limit of cell growth imposed by senescence ensures that the damaged or transformed cell does not transmit their genome. Thus, senescence plays a role in tissue homeostasis and is considered anti-tumorigenic [83]. Nonetheless, the accumulation of senescent cells also has detrimental effects and is associated with aging and age-related disorders [84].

Various stress-inducing stimuli such as telomere shortening, oncogene activation, and oxidative stress can lead to senescence. However, it is persistent DNA damage signaling at shortened telomeres, that is considered essential for initiating and maintaining senescence [85, 86] [87, 88]. Consistent with this, loss of p53 and p21 is sufficient to bypass the senescence of fibroblast cells in culture [89, 90]. In response to oncogene hyperactivation, initiation of DDR signaling coincides with the induction of a senescence phenotype [91-95]. Notably, the end of the proliferative phase is marked by the engagement of the DDR and the accumulation of DNA damage foci.

A key feature of senescence is the secretion of various inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, growth factors and proteases, collectively referred to as senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), which can recruit immune cells and modulate tissue microenvironment [96]. Although, the SASP is connected with the DDR, the molecular events that induce inflammation upon senescence are not well understood. Recent studies showed that senescent cells release chromatin fragments into the cytoplasm to activate immune signaling [18, 68, 97].Compromised nuclear envelope integrity including, reduced Lamin B1 expression is one of the hallmark features of senescent cells [98]. Interestingly, chromatin fragments release into the cytoplasm corelates with lower Lamin B1 expression and compromised nuclear integrity. Unlike micronuclei, these cytoplasmic chromatin fragments (CCFs) lack nuclear envelope, but are positive for DNA damage marker γH2AX [97, 99]. Furthermore, the CCFs are recognized by the cGAS (cyclic GMP-AMP Synthase)/STING pathway, a signaling pathway that mediates recognition and response of cytoplasmic nucleic acids [18, 68, 69]. cGAS was found to colocalize with CCFs in senescent cells and inactivation of cGAS or STING led to accelerated cell growth and inhibition of senescence. Consistently, mice deleted for STING delay DNA damage-dependent aging. Moreover, secretion of various SASP factors was greatly compromised in cGAS or STING-depleted cells. Interestingly, the deletion of cGAS or STING in established senescent cells did not revert the senescent phenotype but reduced the expression of SASP factors [18, 68]. Taken together, these results imply that the engagement of cGAS-STING signaling by CCFs is required for inducing inflammation and the establishment of senescence.

3.3 DNA damage and induction of inflammatory molecules.

The DDR also engages the immune system by activating various proinflammatory factors. Activation of NF-kB in response to DNA damage is one such example. NF-kB belongs to a transcription factor family that plays a role in diverse biological processes, including immunity and inflammation. In resting cells, NF-kB is kept inactive in the cytoplasm through its interaction with a family of inhibitor proteins called IκBs (IKK) complex that consist of IKKα and IKKβ and a regulatory subunit named NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO). Upon stimulus, NF-kB is released from IκBs, translocates to the nucleus, and regulates transcription of its target genes [100, 101]. Early evidence of DNA damage mediated activation of NF-kB came from ATM-deficient cells that showed reduced NF-kB expression after IR [102]. Subsequent studies demonstrated a major requirement for the ATM kinase in activation of NF-kB in response to various DNA lesions. ATM phosphorylates IKK protein NEMO in the nucleus. This ATM-mediated phosphorylation along with SUMOylation of NEMO is a prerequisite for its ubiquitylation and subsequent NF-kB induction [102-106].

Like NF-kB, other interferon responsive factors (IRFs), are activated upon DNA damage. All nine IRF members share an N-terminal DNA binding domain that shares significant homology, while the C terminal is less conserved. The unique functions of IRFs are likely mediated by cell type-specific expression and/or their interaction with other IRF family members and protein factors. IRFs are required for various functions of immune cells [107, 108]. Similar to p53, Irf1−/− mouse embryonic fibroblast did not undergo cell cycle arrest after DNA damage [109]. Interestingly, this DNA damage dependent expression of IRF1 requires ATM, but IRF1 induction in response to virus is ATM-independent [110]. Moreover, IRF1 was shown to involve the Fanconi anemia pathway via Fanconi anemia gene J and accordingly IRF1-depleted cells were hypersensitive to DNA crosslinking agents [111]. IRF3 is a crucial factor in inducing type I interferon signaling. IRF3 is also phosphorylated by DNA-PK resulting in nuclear retention and delayed protein degradation [112]. Finally, IRF5 mRNA expression is induced by p53 upon DNA damage and mediates immune signaling [113].

DNA damage also signals the immune system by overexpressing various ligands that are expressed poorly by normal cells. Natural Killer Group 2D (NKG2D) is a best-characterized receptor that responds to a distressed state of a cell including infection, cellular transformation and genotoxic damage. NKG2D is a C type lectin superfamily stimulatory receptor that is mainly expressed by natural killer (NK) cells, CD8+ T cells, γδ T cells, NK1.1+ T cells, and some myeloid cells. NKG2D recognizes a diverse type of ligands that allow activation of innate as well as adaptive immunity [114]. Stalled replication forks or DNA damaging agents are shown to induce overexpression of mouse and human NKG2D ligands. This appears to involve both ATM and ATR pathway as the silencing of these genes led to the downregulation of ligands [3].

4 Immune signaling and DNA damage.

The above evidence supports the concept that DNA damage induced self-DNA engages immune signaling. A key question is how is DNA damage sensed by the immune system? Research over the last decade has elucidated the molecular mechanisms involved in immune sensing of DNA including immune molecules that act as DNA sensors, the downstream signaling pathways and the cell types that mediate the immune response (Figure 2 and Figure 3).

4.1 Immune sensing and signal transduction induced by DNA.

The innate immune system uses pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) for sensing the presence of non-self, microbial products such as pathogen-associated molecular pattern molecules (PAMP) and self -by-products such as damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) [115]. PRRs that sense DNA as PAMPs and DAMPs either detect lack of modifications commonly present in mammalian DNA or are sensing DNA present in the wrong place at the wrong time. For example, Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) recognizes DNA in endosomal compartments (Figure 2) [116]. It senses ssDNA containing hypomethylated CpG motif [117, 118]. ssDNA binding to TLR9 leads to recruitment of TIR domain-containing adaptor protein MYD88 that helps assemble a multi-protein complex containing IRAK4, TRAF6, TRAF3, IRAK1 and IKKα [116]. This complex phosphorylates transcription factor IRF7 that translocates to the nucleus and induces expression of type I interferons. This signaling complex also activates NF-κb that leads to the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines [119].

In a healthy cell, the presence of DNA in the cytoplasm signals either damage to the cell or the presence of intracellular pathogens. Absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) and cGAS are examples of DNA sensors that sense cytosolic DNA (Figure 3). cGAS is recognized as one of the key cytosolic DNA sensors that connect DNA damage to innate immunity. cGAS was first identified as a pathogen DNA sensor that activates interferon signaling by producing cGAMP second messenger [120-123]. DNA acts as a cofactor activating the enzymatic activity of cGAS to generate second messenger cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) [124-126]. Production of cGAMP leads to the activation of transcription factors IRF3 and NF-κB through the adaptor STING [127]. STING is a transmembrane protein that localizes in ER. Upon cGAMP binding, STING undergoes a conformational change that triggers its relocalization from ER to Golgi [128-130]. This process is believed to recruit and subsequently activate TANK binding kinase (TBK1) and IκBs kinase complex. Activated TBK1 phosphorylates IRF3 leading to its nuclear translocation and expression of type I interferons [131, 132]. In the second loop of the cGAS-STING pathway, activation of NF-κB leads to the expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL6 and TNF as well as type I interferons [133].

AIM2 is a dsDNA sensor in the cytoplasm. In contrast to cGAS, which leads to induction of type I interferon, DNA sensing by AIM2 results in assembly and activation of a multi-protein complex called the AIM2 inflammasome [134-137] (Figure 2). AIM2 Inflammasomes are a three-component system consisting of the AIM2 DNA sensor, an adaptor protein called ASC, and an effector enzyme Caspase 1 (CASP1) [138]. AIM2 has two domains, a pyrin domain that allows it to bind to the adaptor ASC and a HIN domain that binds to DNA. The AIM2 HIN domain can bind any dsDNA segment in a sequence-independent manner to recruit ASC, which in turn recruits CASP1, eventually leading to autoproteolytic cleavage and activation of CASP1 [139]. Once activated, CASP1 cleaves pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and IL-18, generating their active forms. Matured IL-18 and IL-1β are released through a pro-inflammatory programmed cell death known as pyroptosis, which is controlled by CASP1 mediated proteolytic processing and activation of a pore-forming protein called Gasdermin D [140, 141].

Another DNA sensor that localizes both in the nucleus and cytoplasm is the DNA binding AIM2-like receptor, gamma-interferon-inducible protein 16 (IFI16). [142-144]. This sensor recognizes viral DNA in the cytoplasm as well as in the nucleus, thus challenging the view the foreign DNA could only be recognized in the cytoplasm [145-148]. Recently, IFI16 was shown to play a role in sensing self-DNA upon etoposide treatment. In association with ATM and PARP-1, IFI16 activated non-canonical STING signaling that resulted in NF-κB activation (Figure 3). Interestingly, cGAS was not required for STING activation in this scenario [149].

Finally, various DNA repair factors have emerged as sensors of cytoplasmic DNA (Figure 3). For example, DNA-PK can play a role in the innate immune response. DNA-PK is a heterotrimeric complex composed of the DNA-PK catalytic subunit, KU70 and KU80. In addition to its role in adaptive immunity, DNA-PK in a kinase-independent manner was shown to recognize and bind foreign DNA in the cytoplasm leading to IRF3-dependent activation of cytokines and chemokines. The function of DNA-PK is independent of its kinase activity [150]. In another study, Ku70 is reported to induce selective IFN-λ1 activation via the IRF1-IRF7 axis in response to linear DNA in mammalian cells [151]. Likewise, MRE11, a DNA damage nuclear sensor as part of the MRN complex that plays a role in HR and NHEJ pathway, can sense exogenous cytoplasmic dsDNA. Interestingly, it requires its binding partner Rad50 but not NBS1 for binding to cytoplasmic DNA and initiation of IRF3-STING-mediated type I interferon signaling [152].

4.2 Innate immune cell types involved in neuroinflammation.

Microglia:

Microglia are specialized tissue-resident macrophages in the brain that play a key role in nervous system homeostasis as well in immune defense [153-155]. In its role as an immune sentinel, microglia constantly survey and scan their environment for invading pathogens and dying cells, protein aggregates, soluble and particulate antigens and contribute to synaptic pruning and synaptic plasticity. Microglia respond to any pathological event or change in brain homeostasis through a diverse range of receptors that detect DAMP and PAMP molecules as well as neurotransmitters and neuropeptides. Engagement of these receptors results in signaling that generates a variety of responses ranging from phagocytosis of microbes or injured cells, the release of various cytokines and chemokines that are involved in tissue repair, remodeling, and interaction with other cell types [155-160]. Thus, microglia can be activated to act as the first line of defense in response to internal and external threats [155, 161].

In the resting state, microglia appear as highly ramified structures with small soma and long processes that are in constant motion to survey large areas of their brain microenvironment [162]. Resting microglia are characterized by low expression of CD11c, CD45, CD80 and CD86 [163-165]. Perturbation in the brain results in a rapid multistage transformation of microglia resulting in shape alterations, gene expression changes, and alterations in functional properties. Activated microglia retract their long processes and become amoeboid in shape [156]. They may proliferate to increase their number to counter tissue damage or pathogen infection [155, 163, 166, 167]. The induction of many molecules such as Iba1, CD45, MHC-II, CD86, and TMEM119 also characterize microglia activation [164, 168, 169]. Initially, two different states of microglia activation were proposed: the M1 state that is considered as pro-inflammatory; the M2 state, an alternative anti-inflammatory state [170, 171]. Although we still do not fully comprehend the various stages of activation of microglia, recent studies indicate that microglia are more heterogeneous in nature [157, 158, 172-174]. Interestingly DNA damage can drive microglia to a primed state. In an Ercc1 mutant mouse model that is deficient in NER, microglia exhibited hypertrophic morphology, enhanced proliferation and phagocytosis, indicating genotoxic stress can alter the microglia state [175].

Astrocytes:

Astrocytes are the most abundant glial cells and play an active role in maintaining CNS health by providing structural and functional support. Astrocytes provide metabolites and growth factors to neurons, modulate synaptic transmission and regulate the blood-brain barrier. Astrocytes also participate in immune and inflammatory responses in the nervous system by secreting various chemokines and cytokines and recruiting immune cells [176, 177]. Similar to microglia, astrocytes undergo a series of morphological and functional changes in response to CNS insults in a process known as astrogliosis. This process can lead to reversible changes in gene expression to a more long-lasting change such as glia scar formation [178-180]. Analogous to the M1 and M2 phenotypes of microglia, reactive astrocytes are also characterized into A1 and A2 classes. A1 astrocytes are pro-inflammatory in nature while A2 are considered anti-inflammatory and promote neuronal survival and tissue repair [181]. Astrogliosis is a complex reactive process that involves the interaction of astrocytes with other cell types such as microglia, neuronal and non-neuronal cell types [182]. Moreover, the nature, location, and intensity of insult determine the molecular changes in astrocytes associated with astrogliosis [183]. For example, reactive astrocytes in response to microbial endotoxins can exert an inflammatory response that results in the recruitment of immune cells and allow clearance of pathogens. During aging or in a disease state, astrocytes may change profile either through inappropriate gain or loss of functions that lead to neuronal cell death or exacerbates inflammation [176, 179, 184, 185]. Thus, astrogliosis is regulated by various signaling events in a context-dependent manner to exert neuroprotective or neurotoxic effects in the brain.

5 DNA damage and inflammation in neurological disease.

5.1 Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS).

AGS is a rare childhood neuroinflammatory disorder that mainly affects the skin and brain. It is characterized by microcephaly, intracranial calcification, white matter abnormalities, and chilblain skin lesions [186, 187]. Enhanced interferon-alpha levels in the CSF and serum are a hallmark feature of this disease. Interferon-alpha levels decline in CSF over time, but patients frequently have upregulated expression of type I interferon-stimulated genes in the peripheral blood. AGS is an early onset disease with early mortality, however, cases have been reported where symptoms occurred after normal development, thus highlighting phenotypic variability of this disease [186, 188, 189]. AGS is a heterogeneous genetic disease as mutation of any of 7 genes have been linked with AGS; these are, TREX1, RNASEH2A, RNASEH2B, RNASEH2C, SAMHD1, IFIH1, and ADAR1 (Table 1). While the majority of AGS cases are due to homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations leading to reduced expression of these genes, gain of function heterozygous mutations (TREX1, ADAR1 and IFIH1) have also been observed [72, 190-193].

A common theme among AGS-linked genes is that they all play a role in various aspects of nucleic acid metabolism. For example, RNaseH2, a heterotrimeric complex consisting of RNaseH2A, RNaseH2B and RNaseH2C, removes genomic ribonucleotides from DNA and resolves RNA-DNA hybrids [38, 194, 195]. RNaseH2-deleted cells in culture show enhanced misincorporation of genomic ribonucleotides, chronic DNA damage, and senescence [196]. Interestingly, micronuclei formation is enhanced in these cells that leads to cGAS recruitment [59, 61]. RNaseH2 deletion in mice is embryonic lethal, leading to a p53-dependent DNA damage response [196, 197]. In contrast, AGS-linked Rnaseh2aG37S/G37S and Rnaseh2bA174T/A174T knock-in mouse models are perinatal lethal or live a normal life, respectively. These mouse models show upregulation of type I interferon-stimulated genes that is dependent upon the cGAS-STING pathway [195, 198]. However, neuroinflammation or developmental defects are not observed in these mouse models.

SAMHD1 is a deoxynucleotide triphosphate hydrolase. It was first identified as the viral restriction factor that inhibits HIV replication in myeloid cells by reducing the cellular pool of dNTPs [199, 200]. SAMHD1 is recruited to DNA damage foci upon genotoxic agents [201] and also functions in DNA repair by promoting DNA end resection [202]. Recently, it was shown that SAMHD1 stimulates the activity of MRE11 nuclease. This led to the degradation of nascent DNA at stalled replication forks and limited the ssDNA accumulation in the cytoplasm, thereby inhibiting cGAS-STING mediated inflammation [203]. Similar to RNaseH2, Samhd1−/− mice show cGAS-STING mediated inflammation but AGS-associated neurological phenotypes were not observed [204].

Unlike RNASEH2 and SAMHD1, ADAR1 and IFIH1 gene products function in RNA processing. ADAR1 is adenosine to inosine RNA editing enzyme. Adar1−/− mice or AGS-linked Adar1E861A/E861A mice die embryonically and show aberrant interferon induction [205]. Interestingly, this phenotype is rescued by the inactivation of MDA5. It is proposed that ADAR1 hyper-editing prevents the self-recognition of dsRNA by MDA5, thus limiting self-immune response [206].

The IFIH1 gene encodes MDA5 protein and is a pattern recognition receptor for dsRNA in the cytoplasm. Mutations in IFIH1 are autosomal dominant in inheritance [191]. MDA5 binds to dsRNA in a cooperative manner and assembles into a filamentous structure. This allows oligomerization of signaling domain and downstream activation of the adaptor molecule, MAVS. MDA5-AGS variants form tighter filaments and exhibit high basal signaling [207, 208]. Additionally, MDA5-AGS variants assembled efficient filaments on imperfect dsRNA duplexes derived from Alu retroelements compared to wild type protein, leading to constitutive MDA5-dependent signaling and innate immune activation. Intriguingly, these RNA duplexes also activated wild type MDA5 in the absence of ADAR1, further highlighting the role of ADAR1 in RNA editing to allow identification of non-self from self [209].

These studies suggest that aberrant accumulation of nucleic acids, either due to-retrotransposons, DNA damage or replication intermediates-stimulate aberrant innate immune sensing. For example, a recent study suggests that moderate levels of genomic ribonucleotides triggers the immune response and causes perinatal lethality, while excess genomic ribonucleotides result in p53-dependent cell death and embryonic lethality in mice, suggesting a threshold effect of DNA damage [210].

Although AGS is considered a disorder of aberrant immune activation, it is unclear if type I interferon signaling alone is the underlying pathogenic mechanism in AGS. Interestingly, recent data showed that RNASEH2B depletion in the mouse nervous system resulted in an activation of p53-dependent DNA damage signaling. This mouse model recapitulated various neurological phenotypes of AGS, including neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation [210]. However, surprisingly, coincident depletion of cGAS and RNASEH2B did not rescue the neurological phenotype. This indicated that DNA damage independent of type I interferon signaling could drive neurodegeneration in a RNASEH2B-deficent mouse model. This points to genomic instability due to inefficient DNA repair in addition to DNA damage-induced inflammation as a main driver of pathogenesis in this disease. Figure 4 summarizes the key neural cell types implicated in DNA damage-induced pathogenesis and the concomitant diseases linked to defects in the regulation genome stability.

5.2 Ataxia-telangiectasia.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a progressive autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease that is caused by mutations of ATM [211-213]. ATM-deficient cells show marked radio-sensitivity, chromosomal instability and premature senescence. In humans, A-T is characterized by cerebellar degeneration, abnormal eye movement and impaired motor coordination (ataxia). Characteristic neuropathology includes loss of Purkinje and granule cells and is an underlying reason for cerebellar atrophy [212, 214, 215]. A broad spectrum of extra neurological symptoms is also displayed by A-T patients such as cancer susceptibility, immune dysfunction and respiratory infections [216]. Defects in adaptive immunity are associated with various immunological symptoms of A-T disease. Affected individuals have reduced levels of B cells, T cells and one or more classes of the immunoglobins (IgG, IgM and IgA) [217-220]. These phenotypes are attributed to the role of ATM-mediated DSB DNA repair in V(D)J recombination and immunoglobin class switch recombination [221, 222]. Interestingly, despite the prevalence of immunological abnormalities linked to adaptative immunity, systemic bacterial or viral opportunistic infections are uncommon in A-T individuals [217, 223]. Moreover, individuals with A-T suffer from prolonged inflammation that is not entirely explained by defects in the adaptive immune response but suggests the possible involvement of the innate immunity [20, 224]. In Atm−/− mice or ATM-deficient cells, enhanced accumulation of ssDNA in the cytoplasm leads to induction of cGAS-STING signaling followed by type I interferon activation [20]. Likewise, rats with a missense mutation in Atm showed accumulation of ssDNA and dsDNA in the cytoplasm of the cerebellum, hippocampus and spinal cord, type I interferon induction and neurodegeneration [225]. Thus, these studies imply that aberrant immune responses contribute to phenotypes associated with A-T.

5.3 Age-related neurodegenerative disorders.

Neurodegenerative disorders are a broad class of syndromes that involve neuronal dysfunction, protein aggregation, and cell death. A sustained inflammatory response is often seen in patients with neurodegenerative disease, including Alzheimer disease and Parkinson’s disease.

Alzheimer’s disease:

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a common progressive neurodegenerative disease affecting nearly 5 million people in the United States. The characteristic symptoms include dementia, cognitive impairment, and neuronal cell death. The hallmark brain pathology is the occurrence of extracellular beta-amyloid (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) composed of hyperphosphorylated Tau protein. The Aβ plaques are formed by the misprocessing of amyloid precursor protein (APP). The majority of AD cases (90–95%) are sporadic in nature. However, mutations in three genes, APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2, whose products alter amyloid precursor protein processing are associated with AD [226]. Although the etiology of AD is unclear, persistent neuroinflammation is characterized as one of the pathological features of AD. Several proinflammatory (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NFκB) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10 and TGF-β1) are found in AD patients [227-231]. Activated microglia are localized near the Aβ plaques in AD brains [232]. As the disease progress, microglia become enlarged and unable to process these plaques [233-235]. Similarly, reactive gliosis is observed in AD [236]. Astrocytes accumulate Aβ42 and the amount of this correlates positively with the extent of local AD pathology [237]. Additional evidence from GWAS studies have identified around 20 susceptibility loci that are associated with AD risk. These loci encode for various genes that play a role in diverse processes including, neuronal development, synapse formation and immune response [238]. One such example is TREM2, a transmembrane glycoprotein expressed in myeloid cells, including microglia. TREM2 signaling is associated with various cellular processes such as phagocytosis, proliferation, and inflammation [239]. Higher expression of TREM2 is observed in blood of AD patients [240, 241]. Variants of TREM2 or polymorphism confers a great risk of developing AD [242, 243]. Thus, these studies suggest innate immune response and inflammation have a causative role rather than being consequences in AD.

DNA damage and decline in DNA repair are associated with the progression of AD [24, 244-247]. The brain has higher energy consumption and reactive oxygen species are generated as a byproduct. Oxidative damage of nucleic acids is one of the most common lesions that affects the onset of AD. 8OHG, the most common type of oxidation product of guanine, is significantly increased in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in the AD brain [248, 249]. Oxidative damage occurs early prior to the onset of disease symptom thus implying a role in the pathogenesis of AD. In addition to BER defects, increased DSBs were observed in the brains of AD patients and DSB formation is proposed as an early event in AD [250]. An AD mouse model that expresses human APP also showed increased neuronal DSBs compared to control mice [251]. Furthermore, the DSBR factor BRCA1 expression is reduced in the brains of AD individuals and in hAPP transgenic mice. These mice also exhibit learning and memory deficits [252], suggesting DNA damage may feature in the pathogenesis of AD.

Parkinson’s disease (PD):

PD is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disease. PD is characterized by tremor, muscle rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. [253]. The neuropathology of PD is described by the presence of Lewy bodies (alpha-synuclein aggregates) in dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra of the brain [254]. The cause of PD is unknown for most cases and the interplay of both genetic and environmental factors is involved in the etiology of this disease. Emerging studies suggest DNA damage and repair might play a significant role in the progression of PD disease [255]. Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is compromised in dermal fibroblast cells derived from PD patients [256]. Moreover, partial inactivation of mouse Ercc1, a key NER enzyme, compromised dopaminergic neurons. These neurons showed increased γH2AX staining, enhanced oxidation, and astrogliosis [256]. PARP1 activation has also been identified as a key event in pathologic alpha-synuclein toxicity and inhibition of PARP1 prevented the transmission of toxic alpha-synuclein between cells; consistent with this, PAR levels were higher in the brains of PD patients [257]. A recent study also showed increased expression of alpha-synuclein protein within nigral dopaminergic cells that elicits ATM-dependent DNA damage response in a mouse model of PD [258].

Early evidence to support the role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of PD comes from epidemiological studies that suggested that the use of NSAID delayed the onset of PD [259, 260]. GWAS studies have identified new PD risk gene loci linked with the innate and adaptive immune response [261, 262]. Polymorphism in proinflammatory genes TNF-α and IL-1β have also associated with increased susceptibility to PD [263]. In line with this, increased accumulation of proinflammatory cytokine such as IL-6 and TNF-alpha haven been observed in CSF and postmortem brains of PD [264-267]. Widespread microglia activation was observed in AD patients by positron emission tomography [268, 269]. Moreover, peripheral T cells infiltration has been found in brains of individual with AD [270, 271] Although the trigger for T cell recruitment is not fully understood, alpha-synuclein fibrils are able to recruit CD4 T cells, monocytes, macrophages and microglia [272, 273].

Taken together, the above evidence suggests that impaired DNA repair and inflammation can be central features of neurodegenerative disease. While a direct link between DNA repair and inflammation in these neurodegenerative diseases awaits further confirmation, accumulating evidence indicate that DNA damage and inflammation may be involved in the origin and progression of neurodegenerative disease.

6 Conclusions.

DNA is immunogenic in nature. This property is critical for the detection and clearance of pathogens and injured cells by the immune system. To prevent aberrant recognition of self-DNA, various cellular mechanisms are employed by cells to ensure that the immune system is not improperly activated. However, inadequate DNA repair results in genomic instability and senescence that could subsequently engage the immune system. Conversely, persistent DNA damage can result in chronic inflammation and inflammation, which, in turn further exacerbates genomic damage. Thus, the DDR and immune system interactions are closely monitored and coordinated to ensure an appropriate response in a context-specific manner. Although significant progress has been made in identifying the functional connections between the DDR and immune system, many questions still remain. For instance, it is unclear how damaged DNA is distinguished from genomic DNA in the nucleus? Although, it is widely believed that cytoplasmic nucleic acid accumulation is recognized by cytoplasmic DNA sensors, new studies suggest that these sensors are also found in the nucleus. This challenges the long-held view that DNA accumulation in the wrong place results in immune signaling; hnRNPA2B1 is one such example of a DNA sensor recently shown to recognize viral and self-DNA in the nucleus [274]. Moreover, cGAS can be recruited to the nucleus in response to DNA damage in human fibroblast cells [275, 276]. Another key question is whether different types of DNA damage-derived fragments engage similar innate immune sensors. Although DNA sensors usually recognize DNA in a sequence-independent manner, studies have suggested that DNA length could influence the specificity and response of a sensor [277, 278]. Moreover, not all sensors are expressed in all cell types and at similar levels. It is very likely that the nature and strength of stimuli along with the expression of a particular type of DNA sensor and signal transduction molecules may dictate the immune response in the normal and disease state. In line with this, the AIM2 sensor but not cGAS is upregulated in astrocytes and microglia during gliosis in a mouse model of neurodegeneration [279]. Finally, understanding key pathways regulating the neuroprotective versus pathogenic networks in the brain will enhance development of novel therapies for human neurological disorders.

Acknowledgements:

PJM is supported by the NIH (NS-37956, NS-123081, CA-21765), the CCSG (P30 CA21765) and the American Lebanese and Syrian Associated Charities of St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital.

Figure 1: DNA damage response and innate immune activation.

DNA damage signaling can result in cell cycle arrest, apoptosis or senescence depending upon the type of DNA damage and strength of stimulus. Transient cell cycle arrest is beneficial as it pauses proliferation to allow cells to repair DNA damage. However, DNA damage-induced cellular senescence (e.g. telomere erosion) can cause inflammation through induction of SASP. Failure of DNA repair can result in micronuclei formation and accumulation of cytoplasmic DNA. DNA in the micronuclei is recognized by cGAS/STING pathway leading to activation of immune signaling and inflammation. TREX1 exonuclease and DNase2 nucleases suppress accumulation of DNA by degrading various DNA fragments and inhibiting inflammation.

Figure 2: Recognition of DNA by innate immune sensors.

TLR9 is an endosomal DNA sensor that recognizes CpG DNA commonly found in pathogens. Upon recognition of CpG DNA in endosomes, TLR9 interacts with adaptor protein MyD88. After TLR9 engagement, MyD88 acts as a platform to recruit IRAK family members, which leads to nuclear translocation of proinflammatory NF-κB and IRF3 transcription factors and expression of various inflammatory cytokines and Type I interferons. Cytosolic DNA can be recognized by additional DNA sensors. For instance, IFI16 and DNA repair proteins such as, MRE11 and Ku70 can also recognize cytoplasmic DNA. These sensors can activate IRF3 mediated type I interferon signaling through the STING pathway.

Figure 3: Recognition of DNA by AIM2 and cGAS/STING.

DNA damage is recognized by a diverse set of innate immune sensors. AIM2 is a cytoplasmic sensor that detects double stranded DNA of host or microbial origin. Upon DNA binding, AIM2 assembles a multiprotein complex with the help of adaptor ASC and catalytic effector procaspase 1. This complex is known as an inflammasome, where procaspase 1 undergoes autoproteolytic cleavage for activation. Active Caspase 1 induces proinflammatory cell death called Pyroptosis by cleaving Gasdermin D. Caspase1 also cleaves cytokines IL1beta (and others) which are released through Gasdermin D pores to induce inflammatory signaling. cGAS is another type of DNA sensor that detects single and double stranded DNA and DNA-RNA hybrids. cGAS (cyclic GMP-AMP Synthase) activation upon DNA binding results in the generation of second messenger cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), which is a ligand of STING (Stimulator of Interferon Genes) an endoplasmic reticulum-localized protein. Activated STING translocates from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi and recruits Kinases TBK1 and the IKK complex, which phosphorylates the IRF3 transcription factor and NF-κB inhibitor IκBα, respectively. Phosphorylated IRF3 dimerizes and translocates to the nucleus resulting in the activation of type I interferon signaling. IκBα phosphorylation activates NF-κB resulting in activation of proinflammatory signaling.

Figure 4: Multiple neural cell types contribute to neuroinflammation.

DNA damage-induced inflammation can result from various types of DNA damage and can affect multiple neural cell types, which collectively impact neural homeostasis. Key responders to genome instability are glial cells; the microglia and astrocytes, which can also substantially impact neurons. The multifaceted effect of DNA damage in the nervous system can lead to complex outcomes involving different types of DNA damage and can affect different neural cells and/or tissues, and may contribute to a range of neurological diseases, including Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome, ataxia telangiectasia, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease.

Table 1: Diseases Associated with Genome Instability and Neuroinflammation.

Disease	Genes	Inheritance	Protein function	Neurological phenotype	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS1)	TREX1	Autosomal recessive or Autosomal dominant	3′–5′ exonuclease which digests ssDNAand dsDNA with mismatched 3’ termini	Brain atrophy, white matter defects, intracranial calcification, development delay	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS2)	RNASEH2B	Autosomal recessive	A non-catalytic subunit of a RNASEH2 complex that functions as a ribonuclease to remove genomic ribonucleotides and RNA-DNA hybrids	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS3)	RNASEH2C	Autosomal recessive	A non-catalytic subunit of a RNASEH2 complex that functions as a ribonuclease to remove genomic ribonucleotides and RNA-DNA hybrids	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS4	RNASEH2A	Autosomal recessive	A catalytic subunit of a RNASEH2 complex that functions as a ribonuclease to remove genomic ribonucleotides and RNA-DNA hybrids	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS5)	SAMHD1	Autosomal recessive	Deoxynucleoside triphosphate triphosphohydrolase that acts as a regulator of DNA precursor pools by regulating dNTP pools	Intracerebral vasculopathy, spastic paraparesis, brain atrophy, white matter defects, intracranial calcification, development delay	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS6	ADAR	Autosomal recessive or Autosomal dominant	Adenosine deaminase that catalyzes hydrolytic deamination of adenosine to inosine in dsRNA	Bilateral striatal necrosis, brain atrophy, white matter defects, intracranial calcification, development delay	
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS7)	IFIH1	Autosomal dominant	Intracellular sensor of viral RNA that elicits an innate immune response	Brain atrophy, white matter defects, spastic paraparesis, intracranial calcification, development delay	
Ataxia telangiectasia	ATM	Autosomal recessive	A serine threonine protein kinase that functions in DNA break repair	Progressive cerebellar ataxia, late-onset peripheral neuropathy, white matter defects, dystonia, abnormal control of eye movement	
Alzheimer disease (familial)	APP	Autosomal recessive or Autosomal dominant	Multimodal protein that functions as a cell surface receptor or ligand in synaptic plasticity, learning and memory	Progressive memory loss, impairment of learning, speech difficulties, accumulation of Aβ plaques in the brain	
Alzheimer disease (familial)	PSEN1	Autosomal dominant	A subunit of the gamma-secretase complex, that catalyzes cleavage of type I membrane proteins within their transmembrane domain	
Alzheimer disease (familial)	PSEN2	Autosomal dominant	A subunit of the gamma-secretase complex, that catalyzes cleavage of type I membrane proteins within their transmembrane domain	
Parkinson disease (familial)	LRRK2	Autosomal dominant	A multidomain protein that is involved in multiple processes such as neuronal plasticity and vesicle trafficking	Muscle rigidity, tremors, alterations in speech and gait, Lewy bodies and loss of dopaminergic neurons	
Parkinson disease (familial)	SNCA	Autosomal dominant	Neuronal protein that plays several roles in membrane interactions, protein degradation and regulation of dopamine release and transport	
Parkinson disease (familial)	PRKN	Autosomal recessive	E3 ubiquitin ligase that plays a role in mitochondrial quality control	
Parkinson disease (familial)	PINK1	Autosomal recessive	PTEN-induced serine/threonine kinase 1 that plays a role in mitochondrial quality control	

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


References:

[1] Bednarski JJ , Sleckman BP , At the intersection of DNA damage and immune responses, Nature Reviews Immunology, 19 (2019) 231–242.
[2] Nicolas L , Cols M , Choi JE , Chaudhuri J , Vuong B , Generating and repairing genetically programmed DNA breaks during immunoglobulin class switch recombination, F1000Res, 7 (2018) 458.
[3] Gasser S , Orsulic S , Brown EJ , Raulet DH , The DNA damage pathway regulates innate immune system ligands of the NKG2D receptor, Nature, 436 (2005) 1186–1190.15995699
[4] Soriani A , Zingoni A , Cerboni C , Iannitto ML , Ricciardi MR , Di Gialleonardo V , Cippitelli M , Fionda C , Petrucci MT , Guarini A , Foa R , Santoni A , ATM-ATR-dependent upregulation of DNAM-1 and NKG2D ligands on multiple myeloma cells by therapeutic agents results in enhanced NK-cell susceptibility and is associated with a senescent phenotype, Blood, 113 (2009) 3503–3511.19098271
[5] Ardolino M , Zingoni A , Cerboni C , Cecere F , Soriani A , Iannitto ML , Santoni A , DNAM-1 ligand expression on Ag-stimulated T lymphocytes is mediated by ROS-dependent activation of DNA-damage response: relevance for NK-T cell interaction, Blood, 117 (2011) 4778–4786.21406724
[6] Cerboni C , Fionda C , Soriani A , Zingoni A , Doria M , Cippitelli M , Santoni A , The DNA Damage Response: A Common Pathway in the Regulation of NKG2D and DNAM-1 Ligand Expression in Normal, Infected, and Cancer Cells, Front Immunol, 4 (2014) 508.24432022
[7] Wu J , Chen ZJ , Innate immune sensing and signaling of cytosolic nucleic acids, Annu Rev Immunol, 32 (2014) 461–488.24655297
[8] Hu MM , Shu HB , Cytoplasmic Mechanisms of Recognition and Defense of Microbial Nucleic Acids, Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol, 34 (2018) 357–379.30095291
[9] Barbalat R , Ewald SE , Mouchess ML , Barton GM , Nucleic acid recognition by the innate immune system, Annu Rev Immunol, 29 (2011) 185–214.21219183
[10] Gasser S , Zhang WYL , Tan NYJ , Tripathi S , Suter MA , Chew ZH , Khatoo M , Ngeow J , Cheung FSG , Sensing of dangerous DNA, Mech Ageing Dev, 165 (2017) 33–46.27614000
[11] Medzhitov R , Origin and physiological roles of inflammation, Nature, 454 (2008) 428–435.18650913
[12] Heneka MT , Kummer MP , Latz E , Innate immune activation in neurodegenerative disease, Nat Rev Immunol, 14 (2014) 463–477.24962261
[13] Amor S , Puentes F , Baker D , van der Valk P , Inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases, Immunology, 129 (2010) 154–169.20561356
[14] Chavan SS , Pavlov VA , Tracey KJ , Mechanisms and Therapeutic Relevance of Neuro-immune Communication, Immunity, 46 (2017) 927–942.28636960
[15] Marin IA , Kipnis J , Central Nervous System: (Immunological) Ivory Tower or Not?, Neuropsychopharmacology, 42 (2017) 28–35.27402496
[16] Schwartz M , Kipnis J , Rivest S , Prat A , How do immune cells support and shape the brain in health, disease, and aging?, J Neurosci, 33 (2013) 17587–17596.24198349
[17] Kang C , Xu Q , Martin TD , Li MZ , Demaria M , Aron L , Lu T , Yankner BA , Campisi J , Elledge SJ , The DNA damage response induces inflammation and senescence by inhibiting autophagy of GATA4, Science, 349 (2015) aaa5612.
[18] Gluck S , Guey B , Gulen MF , Wolter K , Kang TW , Schmacke NA , Bridgeman A , Rehwinkel J , Zender L , Ablasser A , Innate immune sensing of cytosolic chromatin fragments through cGAS promotes senescence, Nat Cell Biol, 19 (2017) 1061–1070.28759028
[19] Song X , Ma F , Herrup K , Accumulation of Cytoplasmic DNA Due to ATM Deficiency Activates the Microglial Viral Response System with Neurotoxic Consequences, J Neurosci, 39 (2019) 6378–6394.31189575
[20] Hartlova A , Erttmann SF , Raffi FA , Schmalz AM , Resch U , Anugula S , Lienenklaus S , Nilsson LM , Kroger A , Nilsson JA , Ek T , Weiss S , Gekara NO , DNA damage primes the type I interferon system via the cytosolic DNA sensor STING to promote anti-microbial innate immunity, Immunity, 42 (2015) 332–343.25692705
[21] Erdal E , Haider S , Rehwinkel J , Harris AL , McHugh PJ , A prosurvival DNA damage-induced cytoplasmic interferon response is mediated by end resection factors and is limited by Trex1, Genes Dev, 31 (2017) 353–369.28279982
[22] Brzostek-Racine S , Gordon C , Van Scoy S , Reich NC , The DNA damage response induces IFN, J Immunol, 187 (2011) 5336–5345.22013119
[23] Abugable AA , Morris JLM , Palminha NM , Zaksauskaite R , Ray S , El-Khamisy SF , DNA repair and neurological disease: From molecular understanding to the development of diagnostics and model organisms, DNA Repair (Amst), 81 (2019) 102669.
[24] McKinnon PJ , Genome integrity and disease prevention in the nervous system, Genes Dev, 31 (2017) 1180–1194.28765160
[25] Dumitrache LC , Shimada M , Downing SM , Kwak YD , Li Y , Illuzzi JL , Russell HR , Wilson DM 3rd , McKinnon PJ , Apurinic endonuclease-1 preserves neural genome integrity to maintain homeostasis and thermoregulation and prevent brain tumors, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 115 (2018) E12285-E12294.
[26] Frappart PO , Lee Y , Lamont J , McKinnon PJ , BRCA2 is required for neurogenesis and suppression of medulloblastoma, EMBO J, 26 (2007) 2732–2742.17476307
[27] Katyal S , el-Khamisy SF , Russell HR , Li Y , Ju L , Caldecott KW , McKinnon PJ , TDP1 facilitates chromosomal single-strand break repair in neurons and is neuroprotective in vivo, EMBO J, 26 (2007) 4720–4731.17914460
[28] Katyal S , Lee Y , Nitiss KC , Downing SM , Li Y , Shimada M , Zhao J , Russell HR , Petrini JH , Nitiss JL , McKinnon PJ , Aberrant topoisomerase-1 DNA lesions are pathogenic in neurodegenerative genome instability syndromes, Nature neuroscience, 17 (2014) 813–821.24793032
[29] Lee Y , Barnes DE , Lindahl T , McKinnon PJ , Defective neurogenesis resulting from DNA ligase IV deficiency requires Atm, Genes Dev, 14 (2000) 2576–2580.11040211
[30] Shull ER , Lee Y , Nakane H , Stracker TH , Zhao J , Russell HR , Petrini JH , McKinnon PJ , Differential DNA damage signaling accounts for distinct neural apoptotic responses in ATLD and NBS, Genes Dev, 23 (2009) 171–180.19171781
[31] Gao Y , Sun Y , Frank KM , Dikkes P , Fujiwara Y , Seidl KJ , Sekiguchi JM , Rathbun GA , Swat W , Wang J , Bronson RT , Malynn BA , Bryans M , Zhu C , Chaudhuri J , Davidson L , Ferrini R , Stamato T , Orkin SH , Greenberg ME , Alt FW , A critical role for DNA end-joining proteins in both lymphogenesis and neurogenesis, Cell, 95 (1998) 891–902.9875844
[32] Krokan HE , Bjoras M , Base excision repair, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 5 (2013) a012583.
[33] Beard WA , Horton JK , Prasad R , Wilson SH , Eukaryotic Base Excision Repair: New Approaches Shine Light on Mechanism, Annu Rev Biochem, 88 (2019) 137–162.31220977
[34] Marteijn JA , Lans H , Vermeulen W , Hoeijmakers JH , Understanding nucleotide excision repair and its roles in cancer and ageing, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 15 (2014) 465–481.24954209
[35] Kusakabe M , Onishi Y , Tada H , Kurihara F , Kusao K , Furukawa M , Iwai S , Yokoi M , Sakai W , Sugasawa K , Mechanism and regulation of DNA damage recognition in nucleotide excision repair, Genes Environ, 41 (2019) 2.30700997
[36] Jiricny J , Postreplicative mismatch repair, Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 5 (2013) a012633.
[37] Williams JS , Lujan SA , Kunkel TA , Processing ribonucleotides incorporated during eukaryotic DNA replication, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 17 (2016) 350–363.27093943
[38] Sparks JL , Chon H , Cerritelli SM , Kunkel TA , Johansson E , Crouch RJ , Burgers PM , RNase H2-initiated ribonucleotide excision repair, Mol Cell, 47 (2012) 980–986.22864116
[39] Kellner V , Luke B , Molecular and physiological consequences of faulty eukaryotic ribonucleotide excision repair, EMBO J, 39 (2020) e102309.
[40] Wright WD , Shah SS , Heyer WD , Homologous recombination and the repair of DNA double-strand breaks, J Biol Chem, 293 (2018) 10524–10535.29599286
[41] Chang HHY , Pannunzio NR , Adachi N , Lieber MR , Non-homologous DNA end joining and alternative pathways to double-strand break repair, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 18 (2017) 495–506.28512351
[42] Lee Y , Shull ER , Frappart PO , Katyal S , Enriquez-Rios V , Zhao J , Russell HR , Brown EJ , McKinnon PJ , ATR maintains select progenitors during nervous system development, EMBO J, 31 (2012) 1177–1189.22266795
[43] Lee Y , Katyal S , Downing SM , Zhao J , Russell HR , McKinnon PJ , Neurogenesis requires TopBP1 to prevent catastrophic replicative DNA damage in early progenitors, Nat Neurosci, 15 (2012) 819–826.22522401
[44] Madabhushi R , Pan L , Tsai LH , DNA damage and its links to neurodegeneration, Neuron, 83 (2014) 266–282.25033177
[45] Narciso L , Parlanti E , Racaniello M , Simonelli V , Cardinale A , Merlo D , Dogliotti E , The Response to Oxidative DNA Damage in Neurons: Mechanisms and Disease, Neural Plast, 2016 (2016) 3619274.
[46] Thanan R , Oikawa S , Hiraku Y , Ohnishi S , Ma N , Pinlaor S , Yongvanit P , Kawanishi S , Murata M , Oxidative Stress and Its Significant Roles in Neurodegenerative Diseases and Cancer, International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 16 (2015) 193–217.
[47] Enriquez-Rios V , Dumitrache LC , Downing SM , Li Y , Brown EJ , Russell HR , McKinnon PJ , DNA-PKcs ATM , and ATR Interplay Maintains Genome Integrity during Neurogenesis, J Neurosci, 37 (2017) 893–905.28123024
[48] Lanz MC , Dibitetto D , Smolka MB , DNA damage kinase signaling: checkpoint and repair at 30 years, EMBO J, 38 (2019) e101801.
[49] Stokes MP , Rush J , MacNeill J , Ren JM , Sprott K , Nardone J , Yang V , Beausoleil SA , Gygi SP , Livingstone M , Zhang H , Polakiewicz RD , Comb MJ , Profiling of UV-induced ATM/ATR signaling pathways, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 104 (2007) 19855–19860.
[50] Matsuoka S , Ballif BA , Smogorzewska A , McDonald ER , Hurov KE , Luo J , Bakalarski CE , Zhao ZM , Solimini N , Lerenthal Y , Shiloh Y , Gygi SP , Elledge SJ , ATM and ATR substrate analysis reveals extensive protein networks responsive to DNA damage, Science, 316 (2007) 1160–1166.17525332
[51] Bensimon A , Schmidt A , Ziv Y , Elkon R , Wang SY , Chen DJ , Aebersold R , Shiloh Y , ATM-Dependent and -Independent Dynamics of the Nuclear Phosphoproteome After DNA Damage, Sci Signal, 3 (2010).
[52] Matsuoka S , Huang MX , Elledge SJ , Linkage of ATM to cell cycle regulation by the Chk2 protein kinase, Science, 282 (1998) 1893–1897.9836640
[53] Liu QH , Guntuku S , Cui XS , Matsuoka S , Cortez D , Tamai K , Luo GB , Carattini-Rivera S , DeMayo F , Bradley A , Donehower LA , Elledge SJ , Chk1 is an essential kinase that is regulated by Atr and required for the G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint, Gene Dev, 14 (2000) 1448–1459.10859164
[54] Matsuoka S , Rotman G , Ogawa A , Shiloh Y , Tamai K , Elledge SJ , Ataxia telangiectasia-mutated phosphorylates Chk2 in vivo and in vitro, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 97 (2000) 10389–10394.
[55] Zannini L , Delia D , Buscemi G , CHK2 kinase in the DNA damage response and beyond, Journal of Molecular Cell Biology, 6 (2014) 442–457.25404613
[56] Patil M , Pabla N , Dong Z , Checkpoint kinase 1 in DNA damage response and cell cycle regulation, Cell Mol Life Sci, 70 (2013) 4009–4021.23508805
[57] Isaacs A , Cox RA , Rotem Z , Foreign nucleic acids as the stimulus to make interferon, Lancet, 2 (1963) 113–116.13956740
[58] Shen YJ , Le Bert N , Chitre AA , Koo CX , Nga XH , Ho SS , Khatoo M , Tan NY , Ishii KJ , Gasser S , Genome-derived cytosolic DNA mediates type I interferon-dependent rejection of B cell lymphoma cells, Cell Rep, 11 (2015) 460–473.25865892
[59] Bartsch K , Knittler K , Borowski C , Rudnik S , Damme M , Aden K , Spehlmann ME , Frey N , Saftig P , Chalaris A , Rabe B , Absence of RNase H2 triggers generation of immunogenic micronuclei removed by autophagy, Human Molecular Genetics, 26 (2017) 3960–3972.29016854
[60] Harding SM , Benci JL , Irianto J , Discher DE , Minn AJ , Greenberg RA , Mitotic progression following DNA damage enables pattern recognition within micronuclei, Nature, 548 (2017) 466–470.28759889
[61] Mackenzie KJ , Carroll P , Martin CA , Murina O , Fluteau A , Impson DJS , Olova N , Sutcliffe H , Rainger JK , Leitch A , Osborn RT , Wheeler AP , Nowotny M , Gilbert N , Chandra T , Reijns MAM , Jackson AP , cGAS surveillance of micronuclei links genome instability to innate immunity, Nature, 548 (2017) 461-+.28738408
[62] Fenech M , Kirsch-Volders M , Natarajan AT , Surralles J , Crott JW , Parry J , Norppa H , Eastmond DA , Tucker JD , Thomas P , Molecular mechanisms of micronucleus, nucleoplasmic bridge and nuclear bud formation in mammalian and human cells, Mutagenesis, 26 (2011) 125–132.21164193
[63] Luzhna L , Kathiria P , Kovalchuk O , Micronuclei in genotoxicity assessment: from genetics to epigenetics and beyond, Front Genet, 4 (2013) 131.
[64] Hatch EM , Fischer AH , Deerinck TJ , Hetzer MW , Catastrophic nuclear envelope collapse in cancer cell micronuclei, Cell, 154 (2013) 47–60.23827674
[65] Liu S , Kwon M , Mannino M , Yang N , Renda F , Khodjakov A , Pellman D , Nuclear envelope assembly defects link mitotic errors to chromothripsis, Nature, 561 (2018) 551–555.30232450
[66] Maass KK , Rosing F , Ronchi P , Willmund KV , Devens F , Hergt M , Herrmann H , Lichter P , Ernst A , Altered nuclear envelope structure and proteasome function of micronuclei, Experimental cell research, 371 (2018) 353–363.30149001
[67] Willan J , Cleasby AJ , Flores-Rodriguez N , Stefani F , Rinaldo C , Pisciottani A , Grant E , Woodman P , Bryant HE , Ciani B , ESCRT-III is necessary for the integrity of the nuclear envelope in micronuclei but is aberrant at ruptured micronuclear envelopes generating damage, Oncogenesis, 8 (2019) 29.30988276
[68] Dou Z , Ghosh K , Vizioli MG , Zhu J , Sen P , Wangensteen KJ , Simithy J , Lan Y , Lin Y , Zhou Z , Capell BC , Xu C , Xu M , Kieckhaefer JE , Jiang T , Shoshkes-Carmel M , Tanim K , Barber GN , Seykora JT , Millar SE , Kaestner KH , Garcia BA , Adams PD , Berger SL , Cytoplasmic chromatin triggers inflammation in senescence and cancer, Nature, 550 (2017) 402–406.28976970
[69] Yang H , Wang HZ , Ren JY , Chen Q , Chen ZJJ , cGAS is essential for cellular senescence, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 114 (2017) E4612–E4620.28533362
[70] Mazur DJ , Perrino FW , Identification and expression of the TREX1 and TREX2 cDNA sequences encoding mammalian 3’--&gt;5’ exonucleases, J Biol Chem, 274 (1999) 19655–19660.10391904
[71] Baker KP , Baron WF , Henzel WJ , Spencer SA , Molecular cloning and characterization of human and murine DNase II, Gene, 215 (1998) 281–289.9714827
[72] Crow YJ , Hayward BE , Parmar R , Robins P , Leitch A , Ali M , Black DN , van Bokhoven H , Brunner HG , Hamel BC , Corry PC , Cowan FM , Frints SG , Klepper J , Livingston JH , Lynch SA , Massey RF , Meritet JF , Michaud JL , Ponsot G , Voit T , Lebon P , Bonthron DT , Jackson AP , Barnes DE , Lindahl T , Mutations in the gene encoding the 3’−5’ DNA exonuclease TREX1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome at the AGS1 locus, Nat Genet, 38 (2006) 917–920.16845398
[73] Rodero MP , Tesser A , Bartok E , Rice GI , Della Mina E , Depp M , Beitz B , Bondet V , Cagnard N , Duffy D , Dussiot M , Fremond ML , Gattorno M , Guillem F , Kitabayashi N , Porcheray F , Rieux-Laucat F , Seabra L , Uggenti C , Volpi S , Zeef LAH , Alyanakian MA , Beltrand J , Bianco AM , Boddaert N , Brouzes C , Candon S , Caorsi R , Charbit M , Fabre M , Faletra F , Girard M , Harroche A , Hartmann E , Lasne D , Marcuzzi A , Neven B , Nitschke P , Pascreau T , Pastore S , Picard C , Picco P , Piscianz E , Polak M , Quartier P , Rabant M , Stocco G , Taddio A , Uettwiller F , Valencic E , Vozzi D , Hartmann G , Barchet W , Hermine O , Bader-Meunier B , Tommasini A , Crow YJ , Type I interferon-mediated autoinflammation due to DNase II deficiency, Nat Commun, 8 (2017) 2176.29259162
[74] Morita M , Stamp G , Robins P , Dulic A , Rosewell I , Hrivnak G , Daly G , Lindahl T , Barnes DE , Gene-targeted mice lacking the Trex1 (DNase III) 3’--&gt;5’ DNA exonuclease develop inflammatory myocarditis, Mol Cell Biol, 24 (2004) 6719–6727.15254239
[75] Stetson DB , Ko JS , Heidmann T , Medzhitov R , Trex1 prevents cell-intrinsic initiation of autoimmunity, Cell, 134 (2008) 587–598.18724932
[76] Ahn J , Gutman D , Saijo S , Barber GN , STING manifests self DNA-dependent inflammatory disease, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 109 (2012) 19386–19391.
[77] Gall A , Treuting P , Elkon KB , Loo YM , Gale M , Barber GN , Stetson DB , Autoimmunity Initiates in Nonhematopoietic Cells and Progresses via Lymphocytes in an Interferon-Dependent Autoimmune Disease, Immunity, 36 (2012) 120–131.22284419
[78] Gao DX , Li T , Li XD , Chen X , Li QZ , Wight-Carter M , Chen ZJ , Activation of cyclic GMP-AMP synthase by self-DNA causes autoimmune diseases, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 112 (2015) E5699–E5705.
[79] Kawane K , Ohtani M , Miwa K , Kizawa T , Kanbara Y , Yoshioka Y , Yoshikawa H , Nagata S , Chronic polyarthritis caused by mammalian DNA that escapes from degradation in macrophages, Nature, 443 (2006) 998–1002.17066036
[80] Lan YY , Londono D , Bouley R , Rooney MS , Hacohen N , Dnase2a Deficiency Uncovers Lysosomal Clearance of Damaged Nuclear DNA via Autophagy, Cell Reports, 9 (2014) 180–192.25284779
[81] Yang YG , Lindahl T , Barnes DE , Trex1 exonuclease degrades ssDNA to prevent chronic checkpoint activation and autoimmune disease, Cell, 131 (2007) 873–886.18045533
[82] von Kobbe C , Cellular senescence: a view throughout organismal life, Cell Mol Life Sci, 75 (2018) 3553–3567.30030594
[83] Herranz N , Gil J , Mechanisms and functions of cellular senescence, Journal of Clinical Investigation, 128 (2018) 1238–1246.29608137
[84] He S , Sharpless NE , Senescence in Health and Disease, Cell, 169 (2017) 1000–1011.28575665
[85] Takai H , Smogorzewska A , de Lange T , DNA Damage Foci at Dysfunctional Telomeres, Current Biology, 13 (2003) 1549–1556.12956959
[86] di Fagagna FD , Reaper PM , Clay-Farrace L , Fiegler H , Carr P , von Zglinicki T , Saretzki G , Carter NP , Jackson SP , A DNA damage checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence, Nature, 426 (2003) 194–198.14608368
[87] Hemann MT , Strong MA , Hao LY , Greider CW , The shortest telomere, not average telomere length, is critical for cell viability and chromosome stability, Cell, 107 (2001) 67–77.11595186
[88] Zou Y , Sfeir A , Gryaznov SM , Shay JW , Wright WE , Does a sentinel or a subset of short telomeres determine replicative senescence?, Mol Biol Cell, 15 (2004) 3709–3718.15181152
[89] Bond JA , Wyllie FS , Wynfordthomas D , Escape from Senescence in Human-Diploid Fibroblasts Induced Directly by Mutant P53, Oncogene, 9 (1994) 1885–1889.8208534
[90] Brown JP , Wei W , Sedivy JM , Bypass of senescence after disruption of p21CIP1/WAF1 gene in normal diploid human fibroblasts, Science, 277 (1997) 831–834.9242615
[91] Bartkova J , Rezaei N , Liontos M , Karakaidos P , Kletsas D , Issaeva N , Vassiliou LV , Kolettas E , Niforou K , Zoumpourlis VC , Takaoka M , Nakagawa H , Tort F , Fugger K , Johansson F , Sehested M , Andersen CL , Dyrskjot L , Orntoft T , Lukas J , Kittas C , Helleday T , Halazonetis TD , Bartek J , Gorgoulis VG , Oncogene-induced senescence is part of the tumorigenesis barrier imposed by DNA damage checkpoints, Nature, 444 (2006) 633–637.17136093
[92] Denchi EL , Attwooll C , Pasini D , Helin K , Deregulated E2F activity induces hyperplasia and senescence-like features in the mouse pituitary gland, Molecular and Cellular Biology, 25 (2005) 2660–2672.15767672
[93] Di Micco R , Fumagalli M , Cicalese A , Piccinin S , Gasparini P , Luise C , Schurra C , Garre M , Nuciforo PG , Bensimon A , Maestro R , Pelicci PG , d’Adda di Fagagna F , Oncogene-induced senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by DNA hyper-replication, Nature, 444 (2006) 638–642.17136094
[94] Grandori C , Wu KJ , Fernandez P , Ngouenet C , Grim J , Clurman BE , Moser MJ , Oshima J , Russell DW , Swisshelm K , Frank S , Amati B , Dalla-Favera R , Monnat RJ Jr. , Werner syndrome protein limits MYC-induced cellular senescence, Genes Dev, 17 (2003) 1569–1574.12842909
[95] Sarkisian CJ , Keister BA , Stairs DB , Boxer RB , Moody SE , Chodosh LA , Dose-dependent oncogene-induced senescence in vivo and its evasion during mammary tumorigenesis, Nature Cell Biology, 9 (2007) 493–U425.17450133
[96] Faget DV , Ren Q , Stewart SA , Unmasking senescence: context-dependent effects of SASP in cancer, Nat Rev Cancer, 19 (2019) 439–453.31235879
[97] Ivanov A , Pawlikowski J , Manoharan I , van Tuyn J , Nelson DM , Rai TS , Shah PP , Hewitt G , Korolchuk VI , Passos JF , Wu H , Berger SL , Adams PD , Lysosome-mediated processing of chromatin in senescence, J Cell Biol, 202 (2013) 129–143.23816621
[98] Freund A , Laberge RM , Demaria M , Campisi J , Lamin B1 loss is a senescence-associated biomarker, Mol Biol Cell, 23 (2012) 2066–2075.22496421
[99] Hatch EM , Nuclear envelope rupture: little holes, big openings, Curr Opin Cell Biol, 52 (2018) 66–72.29459181
[100] Li Q , Verma IM , NF-kappaB regulation in the immune system, Nat Rev Immunol, 2 (2002) 725–734.12360211
[101] Liu T , Zhang L , Joo D , Sun SC , NF-kappaB signaling in inflammation, Signal Transduct Target Ther, 2 (2017).
[102] Lee SJ , Dimtchev A , Lavin MF , Dritschilo A , Jung M , A novel ionizing radiation-induced signaling pathway that activates the transcription factor NF-kappaB, Oncogene, 17 (1998) 1821–1826.9778048
[103] Li N , Banin S , Ouyang H , Li GC , Courtois G , Shiloh Y , Karin M , Rotman G , ATM is required for IkappaB kinase (IKKk) activation in response to DNA double strand breaks, J Biol Chem, 276 (2001) 8898–8903.11114307
[104] Piret B , Schoonbroodt S , Piette J , The ATM protein is required for sustained activation of NF-kappaB following DNA damage, Oncogene, 18 (1999) 2261–2271.10327072
[105] Wu ZH , Shi Y , Tibbetts RS , Miyamoto S , Molecular linkage between the kinase ATM and NF-kappaB signaling in response to genotoxic stimuli, Science, 311 (2006) 1141–1146.16497931
[106] Panta GR , Kaur S , Cavin LG , Cortes ML , Mercurio F , Lothstein L , Sweatman TW , Israel M , Arsura M , ATM and the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase activate NF-kappaB through a common MEK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase/p90(rsk) signaling pathway in response to distinct forms of DNA damage, Mol Cell Biol, 24 (2004) 1823–1835.14966265
[107] Zhao GN , Jiang DS , Li HL , Interferon regulatory factors: at the crossroads of immunity, metabolism, and disease, Bba-Mol Basis Dis, 1852 (2015) 365–378.
[108] Tamura T , Yanai H , Savitsky D , Taniguchi T , The IRF family transcription factors in immunity and oncogenesis, Annual Review of Immunology, 26 (2008) 535–584.
[109] Tanaka N , Ishihara M , Lamphier MS , Nozawa H , Matsuyama T , Mak TW , Aizawa S , Tokino T , Oren M , Taniguchi T , Cooperation of the tumour suppressors IRF-1 and p53 in response to DNA damage, Nature, 382 (1996) 816–818.8752276
[110] Pamment J , Ramsay E , Kelleher M , Dornan D , Ball KL , Regulation of the IRF-1 tumour modifier during the response to genotoxic stress involves an ATM-dependent signalling pathway, Oncogene, 21 (2002) 7776–7785.12420214
[111] Frontini M , Vijayakumar M , Garvin A , Clarke N , A ChIP-chip approach reveals a novel role for transcription factor IRF1 in the DNA damage response, Nucleic Acids Res, 37 (2009) 1073–1085.19129219
[112] Karpova AY , Trost M , Murray JM , Cantley LC , Howley PM , Interferon regulatory factor-3 is an in vivo target of DNA-PK, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 99 (2002) 2818–2823.11867762
[113] Mori T , Anazawa Y , Iiizumi M , Fukuda S , Nakamura Y , Arakawa H , Identification of the interferon regulatory factor 5 gene (IRF-5) as a direct target for p53, Oncogene, 21 (2002) 2914–2918.11973653
[114] Lanier LL , NKG2D Receptor and Its Ligands in Host Defense, Cancer Immunol Res, 3 (2015) 575–582.26041808
[115] Amarante-Mendes GP , Adjemian S , Branco LM , Zanetti LC , Weinlich R , Bortoluci KR , Pattern Recognition Receptors and the Host Cell Death Molecular Machinery, Frontiers in Immunology, 9 (2018).
[116] Kawai T , Akira S , The role of pattern-recognition receptors in innate immunity: update on Toll-like receptors, Nat Immunol, 11 (2010) 373–384.20404851
[117] Cornelie S , Hoebeke J , Schacht AM , Bertin B , Vicogne J , Capron M , Riveau G , Direct evidence that toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) functionally binds plasmid DNA by specific cytosine-phosphate-guanine motif recognition, Journal of Biological Chemistry, 279 (2004) 15124–15129.14736866
[118] Rutz M , Metzger J , Gellert T , Luppa P , Lipford GB , Wagner H , Bauer S , Toll-like receptor 9 binds single-stranded CpG-DNA in a sequence- and pH-dependent manner, Eur J Immunol, 34 (2004) 2541–2550.15307186
[119] Kawai T , Akira S , Toll-like Receptor and RIG-1-like Receptor Signaling, Ann Ny Acad Sci, 1143 (2008) 1–20.19076341
[120] Gao DX , Wu JX , Wu YT , Du FH , Aroh C , Yan N , Sun LJ , Chen ZJJ , Cyclic GMP-AMP Synthase Is an Innate Immune Sensor of HIV and Other Retroviruses, Science, 341 (2013) 903906.
[121] Sun LJ , Wu JX , Du FH , Chen X , Chen ZJJ , Cyclic GMP-AMP Synthase Is a Cytosolic DNA Sensor That Activates the Type I Interferon Pathway, Science, 339 (2013) 786–791.23258413
[122] Wu JX , Sun LJ , Chen X , Du FH , Shi HP , Chen C , Chen ZJJ , Cyclic GMP-AMP Is an Endogenous Second Messenger in Innate Immune Signaling by Cytosolic DNA, Science, 339 (2013) 826–830.23258412
[123] Ablasser A , Goldeck M , Cavlar T , Deimling T , Witte G , Rohl I , Hopfner KP , Ludwig J , Hornung V , cGAS produces a 2 ‘−5 ‘-linked cyclic dinucleotide second messenger that activates STING, Nature, 498 (2013) 380-+.23722158
[124] Zhang X , Wu JX , Du FH , Xu H , Sun LJ , Chen Z , Brautigam CA , Zhang XW , Chen ZJJ , The Cytosolic DNA Sensor cGAS Forms an Oligomeric Complex with DNA and Undergoes Switch-like Conformational Changes in the Activation Loop, Cell Reports, 6 (2014) 421–430.24462292
[125] Kranzusch PJ , Lee ASY , Berger JM , Doudna JA , Structure of Human cGAS Reveals a Conserved Family of Second-Messenger Enzymes in Innate Immunity, Cell Reports, 3 (2013) 1362–1368.23707061
[126] Civril F , Deimling T , Mann CCD , Ablasser A , Moldt M , Witte G , Hornung V , Hopfner KP , Structural mechanism of cytosolic DNA sensing by cGAS, Nature, 498 (2013) 332-+.
[127] Motwani M , Pesiridis S , Fitzgerald KA , DNA sensing by the cGAS-STING pathway in health and disease, Nat Rev Genet, (2019).
[128] Ishikawa H , Ma Z , Barber GN , STING regulates intracellular DNA-mediated, type I interferon-dependent innate immunity, Nature, 461 (2009) 788–U740.19776740
[129] Gao P , Ascano M , Zillinger T , Wang WY , Dai PH , Serganov AA , Gaffney BL , Shuman S , Jones RA , Deng L , Hartmann G , Barchet W , Tuschl T , Patel DJ , Structure-Function Analysis of STING Activation by c[G(2 ‘,5 ‘) pA(3 ‘,5 ‘)p] and Targeting by Antiviral DMXAA, Cell, 154 (2013) 748–762.23910378
[130] Zhang X , Shi H , Wu J , Zhang X , Sun L , Chen C , Chen ZJ , Cyclic GMP-AMP containing mixed phosphodiester linkages is an endogenous high-affinity ligand for STING, Mol Cell, 51 (2013) 226–235.23747010
[131] Liu S , Cai X , Wu J , Cong Q , Chen X , Li T , Du F , Ren J , Wu YT , Grishin NV , Chen ZJ , Phosphorylation of innate immune adaptor proteins MAVS, STING, and TRIF induces IRF3 activation, Science, 347 (2015) aaa2630.
[132] Tanaka Y , Chen ZJ , STING specifies IRF3 phosphorylation by TBK1 in the cytosolic DNA signaling pathway, Sci Signal, 5 (2012) ra20.
[133] Abe T , Barber GN , Cytosolic-DNA-mediated STING -dependent proinflammatory gene induction necessitates canonical NF-kappaB activation through TBK1, J Virol, 88 (2014) 5328–5341.24600004
[134] Hornung V , Ablasser A , Charrel-Dennis M , Bauernfeind F , Horvath G , Caffrey DR , Latz E , Fitzgerald KA , AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-activating inflammasome with ASC, Nature, 458 (2009) 514–U516.19158675
[135] Burckstummer T , Baumann C , Bluml S , Dixit E , Durnberger G , Jahn H , Planyavsky M , Bilban M , Colinge J , Bennett KL , Superti-Furga G , An orthogonal proteomic-genomic screen identifies AIM2 as a cytoplasmic DNA sensor for the inflammasome, Nat Immunol, 10 (2009) 266–272.19158679
[136] Fernandes-Alnemri T , Yu JW , Datta P , Wu JH , Alnemri ES , AIM2 activates the inflammasome and cell death in response to cytoplasmic DNA, Nature, 458 (2009) 509–U505.19158676
[137] Roberts TL , Idris A , Dunn JA , Kelly GM , Burnton CM , Hodgson S , Hardy LL , Garceau V , Sweet MJ , Ross IL , Hume DA , Stacey KJ , HIN-200 Proteins Regulate Caspase Activation in Response to Foreign Cytoplasmic DNA, Science, 323 (2009) 1057–1060.19131592
[138] Broz P , Dixit VM , Inflammasomes: mechanism of assembly, regulation and signalling, Nature Reviews Immunology, 16 (2016) 407–420.
[139] Lu A , Magupalli VG , Ruan J , Yin Q , Atianand MK , Vos MR , Schroder GF , Fitzgerald KA , Wu H , Egelman EH , Unified polymerization mechanism for the assembly of ASC-dependent inflammasomes, Cell, 156 (2014) 1193–1206.24630722
[140] Shi JJ , Zhao Y , Wang K , Shi XY , Wang Y , Huang HW , Zhuang YH , Cai T , Wang FC , Shao F , Cleavage of GSDMD by inflammatory caspases determines pyroptotic cell death, Nature, 526 (2015) 660–665.26375003
[141] Kayagaki N , Stowe IB , Lee BL , O’Rourke K , Anderson K , Warming S , Cuellar T , Haley B , Roose-Girma M , Phung QT , Liu PS , Lill JR , Li H , Wu JS , Kummerfeld S , Zhang J , Lee WP , Snipas SJ , Salvesen GS , Morris LX , Fitzgerald L , Zhang YF , Bertram EM , Goodnow CC , Dixit VM , Caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D for non-canonical inflammasome signalling, Nature, 526 (2015) 666–671.26375259
[142] Morrone SR , Wang T , Constantoulakis LM , Hooy RM , Delannoy MJ , Sohn J , Cooperative assembly of IFI16 filaments on dsDNA provides insights into host defense strategy, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 111 (2014) E62–E71.
[143] Jin TC , Perry A , Jiang JS , Smith P , Curry JA , Unterholzner L , Jiang ZZ , Horvath G , Rathinam VA , Johnstone RW , Hornung V , Latz E , Bowie AG , Fitzgerald KA , Xiao TS , Structures of the HIN Domain: DNA Complexes Reveal Ligand Binding and Activation Mechanisms of the AIM2 Inflammasome and IFI16 Receptor, Immunity, 36 (2012) 561–571.22483801
[144] Schattgen SA , Fitzgerald KA , The PYHIN protein family as mediators of host defenses, Immunol Rev, 243 (2011) 109–118.21884171
[145] Unterholzner L , Keating SE , Baran M , Horan KA , Jensen SB , Sharma S , Sirois CM , Jin TC , Latz E , Xiao TS , Fitzgerald KA , Paludan SR , Bowie AG , IFI16 is an innate immune sensor for intracellular DNA, Nat Immunol, 11 (2010) 997–U942.20890285
[146] Orzalli MH , DeLuca NA , Knipe DM , Nuclear IFI16 induction of IRF-3 signaling during herpesviral infection and degradation of IFI16 by the viral ICP0 protein, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 109 (2012) E3008–E3017.
[147] Li T , Diner BA , Chen J , Cristea IM , Acetylation modulates cellular distribution and DNA sensing ability of interferon-inducible protein IFI16, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 109 (2012) 10558–10563.
[148] Stratmann SA , Morrone SR , van Oijen AM , Sohn J , The innate immune sensor IFI16 recognizes foreign DNA in the nucleus by scanning along the duplex, Elife, 4 (2015).
[149] Dunphy G , Flannery SM , Almine JF , Connolly DJ , Paulus C , Jonsson KL , Jakobsen MR , Nevels MM , Bowie AG , Unterholzner L , Non-canonical Activation of the DNA Sensing Adaptor STING by ATM and IFI16 Mediates NF-kappaB Signaling after Nuclear DNA Damage, Mol Cell, 71 (2018) 745–760 e745.30193098
[150] Ferguson BJ , Mansur DS , Peters NE , Ren H , Smith GL , DNA-PK is a DNA sensor for IRF-3-dependent innate immunity, Elife, 1 (2012) e00047.
[151] Zhang X , Brann TW , Zhou M , Yang J , Oguariri RM , Lidie KB , Imamichi H , Huang DW , Lempicki RA , Baseler MW , Veenstra TD , Young HA , Lane HC , Imamichi T , Cutting edge: Ku70 is a novel cytosolic DNA sensor that induces type III rather than type I IFN, J Immunol, 186 (2011) 4541–4545.21398614
[152] Kondo T , Kobayashi J , Saitoh T , Maruyama K , Ishii KJ , Barber GN , Komatsu K , Akira S , Kawai T , DNA damage sensor MRE11 recognizes cytosolic double-stranded DNA and induces type I interferon by regulating STING trafficking, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 110 (2013) 2969–2974.23388631
[153] Li Q , Barres BA , Microglia and macrophages in brain homeostasis and disease, Nat Rev Immunol, 18 (2018) 225–242.29151590
[154] Wolf SA , Boddeke HW , Kettenmann H , Microglia in Physiology and Disease, Annu Rev Physiol, 79 (2017) 619–643.27959620
[155] Kettenmann H , Hanisch UK , Noda M , Verkhratsky A , Physiology of microglia, Physiol Rev, 91 (2011) 461–553.21527731
[156] Young AMH , Kumasaka N , Calvert F , Hammond TR , Knights A , Panousis N , Park JS , Schwartzentruber J , Liu J , Kundu K , Segel M , Murphy NA , McMurran CE , Bulstrode H , Correia J , Budohoski KP , Joannides A , Guilfoyle MR , Trivedi R , Kirollos R , Morris R , Garnett MR , Timofeev I , Jalloh I , Holland K , Mannion R , Mair R , Watts C , Price SJ , Kirkpatrick PJ , Santarius T , Mountjoy E , Ghoussaini M , Soranzo N , Bayraktar OA , Stevens B , Hutchinson PJ , Franklin RJM , Gaffney DJ , A map of transcriptional heterogeneity and regulatory variation in human microglia, Nat Genet, 53 (2021) 861–868.34083789
[157] Masuda T , Sankowski R , Staszewski O , Prinz M , Microglia Heterogeneity in the Single-Cell Era, Cell Rep, 30 (2020) 1271–1281.32023447
[158] Masuda T , Sankowski R , Staszewski O , Bottcher C , Amann L , Sagar C . Scheiwe S . Nessler P . Kunz G . van Loo VA Coenen PC Reinacher A . Michel U . Sure R . Gold D . Grun J . Priller C . Stadelmann M . Prinz, Spatial and temporal heterogeneity of mouse and human microglia at single-cell resolution, Nature, 566 (2019) 388–392.30760929
[159] Hammond TR , Dufort C , Dissing-Olesen L , Giera S , Young A , Wysoker A , Walker AJ , Gergits F , Segel M , Nemesh J , Marsh SE , Saunders A , Macosko E , Ginhoux F , Chen J , Franklin RJM , Piao X , McCarroll SA , Stevens B , Single-Cell RNA Sequencing of Microglia throughout the Mouse Lifespan and in the Injured Brain Reveals Complex Cell-State Changes, Immunity, 50 (2019) 253–271.e256.30471926
[160] Nimmerjahn A , Kirchhoff F , Helmchen F , Resting microglial cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo, Science, 308 (2005) 1314–1318.15831717
[161] Wolf SA , Boddeke HWGM , Kettenmann H , Microglia in Physiology and Disease, Annu Rev Physiol, 79 (2017) 619–643.27959620
[162] Nimmerjahn A , Kirchhoff F , Helmchen F , Resting microglial cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo, Science, 308 (2005) 1314–1318.15831717
[163] Lynch MA , The Multifaceted Profile of Activated Microglia, Mol Neurobiol, 40 (2009) 139–156.19629762
[164] Ponomarev ED , Shriver LP , Maresz K , Dittel BN , Microglial cell activation and proliferation precedes the onset of CNS autoimmunity, J Neurosci Res, 81 (2005) 374–389.15959904
[165] Prinz M , Priller J , Sisodia SS , Ransohoff RM , Heterogeneity of CNS myeloid cells and their roles in neurodegeneration, Nature Neuroscience, 14 (2011) 1227–1235.21952260
[166] Stence N , Waite M , Dailey ME , Dynamics of microglial activation: A confocal time-lapse analysis in hippocampal slices, Glia, 33 (2001) 256–266.11241743
[167] Kreutzberg GW , Microglia: A sensor for pathological events in the CNS, Trends Neurosci, 19 (1996) 312–318.8843599
[168] Bennett ML , Bennett FC , Liddelow SA , Ajami B , Zamanian JL , Fernhoff NB , Mulinyawe SB , Bohlen CJ , Adil A , Tucker A , Weissman IL , Chang EF , Li G , Grant GA , Gephart MGH , Barres BA , New tools for studying microglia in the mouse and human CNS, P Natl Acad Sci USA, 113 (2016) E1738–E1746.
[169] Ito D , Imai Y , Ohsawa K , Nakajima K , Fukuuchi Y , Kohsaka S , Microglia-specific localisation of a novel calcium binding protein, Iba1, Brain Res Mol Brain Res, 57 (1998) 1–9.9630473
[170] Orihuela R , McPherson CA , Harry GJ , Microglial M1/M2 polarization and metabolic states, Brit J Pharmacol, 173 (2016) 649–665.25800044
[171] Tang Y , Le WD , Differential Roles of M1 and M2 Microglia in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Mol Neurobiol, 53 (2016) 1181–1194.25598354
[172] Hammond TR , Dufort C , Dissing-Olesen L , Giera S , Young A , Wysoker A , Walker AJ , Gergits F , Segel M , Nemesh J , Marsh SE , Saunders A , Macosko E , Ginhoux F , Chen JM , Franklin RJM , Piao XH , McCarroll SA , Stevens B , Single-Cell RNA Sequencing of Microglia throughout the Mouse Lifespan and in the Injured Brain Reveals Complex Cell-State Changes, Immunity, 50 (2019) 253-+.30471926
[173] Keren-Shaul H , Spinrad A , Weiner A , Matcovitch-Natan O , Dvir-Szternfeld R , Ulland TK , David E , Baruch K , Lara-Astaiso D , Toth B , Itzkovitz S , Colonna M , Schwartz M , Amit I , A Unique Microglia Type Associated with Restricting Development of Alzheimer’s Disease, Cell, 169 (2017) 1276-+.28602351
[174] Mathys H , Adaikkan C , Gao F , Young JZ , Manet E , Hemberg M , De Jager PL , Ransohoff RM , Regev A , Tsai LH , Temporal Tracking of Microglia Activation in Neurodegeneration at Single-Cell Resolution, Cell Rep, 21 (2017) 366–380.29020624
[175] Raj DDA , Jaarsma D , Holtman IR , Olah M , Ferreira FM , Schaafsma W , Brouwer N , Meijer MM , de Waard MC , van der Pluijm I , Brandt R , Kreft KL , Laman JD , de Haan G , Biber KPH , Hoeijmakers JHJ , Eggen BJL , Boddeke HWGM , Priming of microglia in a DNA-repair deficient model of accelerated aging, Neurobiology of Aging, 35 (2014) 2147–2160.24799273
[176] Sofroniew MV , Vinters HV , Astrocytes: biology and pathology, Acta Neuropathol, 119 (2010) 7–35.20012068
[177] Verkhratsky A , Nedergaard M , Physiology of Astroglia, Physiological Reviews, 98 (2018) 239–389.29351512
[178] Pekny M , Nilsson M , Astrocyte activation and reactive gliosis, Glia, 50 (2005) 427–434.15846805
[179] Pekny M , Pekna M , Astrocyte Reactivity and Reactive Astrogliosis: Costs and Benefits, Physiological Reviews, 94 (2014) 1077–1098.25287860
[180] Sofroniew MV , Astrogliosis, Csh Perspect Biol, 7 (2015).
[181] Liddelow SA , Barres B , Reactive Astrocytes: Production, Function, and Therapeutic Potential, Immunity, 46 (2017) 957–967.28636962
[182] Burda JE , Sofroniew MV , Reactive Gliosis and the Multicellular Response to CNS Damage and Disease, Neuron, 81 (2014) 229–248.24462092
[183] Anderson MA , Ao Y , Sofroniew MV , Heterogeneity of reactive astrocytes, Neurosci Lett, 565 (2014) 23–29.24361547
[184] Colombo E , Farina C , Astrocytes: Key Regulators of Neuroinflammation, Trends Immunol, 37 (2016) 608–620.27443914
[185] Rothhammer V , Quintana FJ , Control of autoimmune CNS inflammation by astrocytes, Semin Immunopathol, 37 (2015) 625–638.26223505
[186] Crow YJ , Manel N , Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome and the type I interferonopathies, Nat Rev Immunol, 15 (2015) 429–440.26052098
[187] Uggenti C , Lepelley A , Crow YJ , Self-Awareness: Nucleic Acid-Driven Inflammation and the Type I Interferonopathies, Annu Rev Immunol, 37 (2019) 247–267.30633609
[188] Crow YJ , Livingston JH , Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome: an important Mendelian mimic of congenital infection, Dev Med Child Neurol, 50 (2008) 410–416.18422679
[189] Livingston JH , Crow YJ , Neurologic Phenotypes Associated with Mutations in TREX1, RNASEH2A, RNASEH2B, RNASEH2C, SAMHD1, ADAR1, and IFIH1: Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome and Beyond, Neuropediatrics, 47 (2016) 355–360.27643693
[190] Crow YJ , Leitch A , Hayward BE , Garner A , Parmar R , Griffith E , Ali M , Semple C , Aicardi J , Babul-Hirji R , Baumann C , Baxter P , Bertini E , Chandler KE , Chitayat D , Cau D , Dery C , Fazzi E , Goizet C , King MD , Klepper J , Lacombe D , Lanzi G , Lyall H , Martinez-Frias ML , Mathieu M , McKeown C , Monier A , Oade Y , Quarrell OW , Rittey CD , Rogers RC , Sanchis A , Stephenson JB , Tacke U , Till M , Tolmie JL , Tomlin P , Voit T , Weschke B , Woods CG , Lebon P , Bonthron DT , Ponting CP , Jackson AP , Mutations in genes encoding ribonuclease H2 subunits cause Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome and mimic congenital viral brain infection, Nat Genet, 38 (2006) 910–916.16845400
[191] Rice GI , Del Toro Duany Y , Jenkinson EM , Forte GM , Anderson BH , Ariaudo G , Bader-Meunier B , Baildam EM , Battini R , Beresford MW , Casarano M , Chouchane M , Cimaz R , Collins AE , Cordeiro NJ , Dale RC , Davidson JE , De Waele L , Desguerre I , Faivre L , Fazzi E , Isidor B , Lagae L , Latchman AR , Lebon P , Li C , Livingston JH , Lourenco CM , Mancardi MM , Masurel-Paulet A , McInnes IB , Menezes MP , Mignot C , O’Sullivan J , Orcesi S , Picco PP , Riva E , Robinson RA , Rodriguez D , Salvatici E , Scott C , Szybowska M , Tolmie JL , Vanderver A , Vanhulle C , Vieira JP , Webb K , Whitney RN , Williams SG , Wolfe LA , Zuberi SM , Hur S , Crow YJ , Gain-of-function mutations in IFIH1 cause a spectrum of human disease phenotypes associated with upregulated type I interferon signaling, Nat Genet, 46 (2014) 503–509.24686847
[192] Rice GI , Bond J , Asipu A , Brunette RL , Manfield IW , Carr IM , Fuller JC , Jackson RM , Lamb T , Briggs TA , Ali M , Gornall H , Couthard LR , Aeby A , Attard-Montalto SP , Bertini E , Bodemer C , Brockmann K , Brueton LA , Corry PC , Desguerre I , Fazzi E , Cazorla AG , Gener B , Hamel BCJ , Heiberg A , Hunter M , van der Knaap MS , Kumar R , Lagae L , Landrieu PG , Lourenco CM , Marom D , McDermott MF , van der Merwe W , Orcesi S , Prendiville JS , Rasmussen M , Shalev SA , Soler DM , Shinawi M , Spiegel R , Tan TY , Vanderver A , Wakeling EL , Wassmer E , Whittaker E , Lebon P , Stetson DB , Bonthron DT , Crow YJ , Mutations involved in Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome implicate SAMHD1 as regulator of the innate immune response, Nature Genetics, 41 (2009) 829–U889.19525956
[193] Rice GI , Kasher PR , Forte GMA , Mannion NM , Greenwood SM , Szynkiewicz M , Dickerson JE , Bhaskar SS , Zampini M , Briggs TA , Jenkinson EM , Bacino CA , Battini R , Bertini E , Brogan PA , Brueton LA , Carpanelli M , De Laet C , de Lonlay P , del Toro M , Desguerre I , Fazzi E , Garcia-Cazorla A , Heiberg A , Kawaguchi M , Kumar R , Lin JPSM , Lourenco CM , Male AM , Marques W , Mignot C , Olivieri I , Orcesi S , Prabhakar P , Rasmussen M , Robinson RA , Rozenberg F , Schmidt JL , Steindl K , Tan TY , van der Merwe WG , Vanderver A , Vassallo G , Wakeling EL , Wassmer E , Whittaker E , Livingston JH , Lebon P , Suzuki T , McLaughlin PJ , Keegan LP , O’Connell MA , Lovell SC , Crow YJ , Mutations in ADAR1 cause Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome associated with a type I interferon signature, Nature Genetics, 44 (2012) 1243–1248.23001123
[194] Cristini A , Tellier M , Constantinescu F , Accalai C , Albulescu LO , Heiringhoff R , Bery N , Sordet O , Murphy S , Gromak N , RNase H2, mutated in Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, resolves co-transcriptional R-loops to prevent DNA breaks and inflammation, Nat Commun, 13 (2022) 2961.35618715
[195] Pokatayev V , Hasin N , Chon H , Cerritelli SM , Sakhuja K , Ward JM , Morris HD , Yan N , Crouch RJ , RNase H2 catalytic core Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome-related mutant invokes cGASS-TING innate immune-sensing pathway in mice, J Exp Med, 213 (2016) 329–336.26880576
[196] Reijns MA , Rabe B , Rigby RE , Mill P , Astell KR , Lettice LA , Boyle S , Leitch A , Keighren M , Kilanowski F , Devenney PS , Sexton D , Grimes G , Holt IJ , Hill RE , Taylor MS , Lawson KA , Dorin JR , Jackson AP , Enzymatic removal of ribonucleotides from DNA is essential for mammalian genome integrity and development, Cell, 149 (2012) 1008–1022.22579044
[197] Hiller B , Achleitner M , Glage S , Naumann R , Behrendt R , Roers A , Mammalian RNase H2 removes ribonucleotides from DNA to maintain genome integrity, J Exp Med, 209 (2012) 1419–1426.22802351
[198] Mackenzie KJ , Carroll P , Lettice L , Tarnauskaite Z , Reddy K , Dix F , Revuelta A , Abbondati E , Rigby RE , Rabe B , Kilanowski F , Grimes G , Fluteau A , Devenney PS , Hill RE , Reijns MA , Jackson AP , Ribonuclease H2 mutations induce a cGAS/STING-dependent innate immune response, EMBO J, 35 (2016) 831–844.26903602
[199] Laguette N , Sobhian B , Casartelli N , Ringeard M , Chable-Bessia C , Segeral E , Yatim A , Emiliani S , Schwartz O , Benkirane M , SAMHD1 is the dendritic- and myeloid-cell-specific HIV-1 restriction factor counteracted by Vpx, Nature, 474 (2011) 654–657.21613998
[200] Hrecka K , Hao CL , Gierszewska M , Swanson SK , Kesik-Brodacka M , Srivastava S , Florens L , Washburn MP , Skowronski J , Vpx relieves inhibition of HIV-1 infection of macrophages mediated by the SAMHD1 protein, Nature, 474 (2011) 658–U137.21720370
[201] Clifford R , Louis T , Robbe P , Ackroyd S , Burns A , Timbs AT , Colopy GW , Dreau H , Sigaux F , Judde JG , Rotger M , Telenti A , Lin YL , Pasero P , Maelfait J , Titsias M , Cohen DR , Henderson SJ , Ross MT , Bentley D , Hillmen P , Pettitt A , Rehwinkel J , Knight SJL , Taylor JC , Crow YJ , Benkirane M , Schuh A , SAMHD1 is mutated recurrently in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and is involved in response to DNA damage, Blood, 123 (2014) 1021–1031.24335234
[202] Daddacha W , Koyen AE , Bastien AJ , Head PE , Dhere VR , Nabeta GN , Connolly EC , Werner E , Madden MZ , Daly MB , Minten EV , Whelan DR , Schlafstein AJ , Zhang H , Anand R , Doronio C , Withers AE , Shepard C , Sundaram RK , Deng X , Dynan WS , Wang Y , Bindra RS , Cejka P , Rothenberg E , Doetsch PW , Kim B , Yu DS , SAMHD1 Promotes DNA End Resection to Facilitate DNA Repair by Homologous Recombination, Cell Rep, 20 (2017) 1921–1935.28834754
[203] Coquel F , Silva MJ , Techer H , Zadorozhny K , Sharma S , Nieminuszczy J , Mettling C , Dardillac E , Barthe A , Schmitz AL , Promonet A , Cribier A , Sarrazin A , Niedzwiedz W , Lopez B , Costanzo V , Krejci L , Chabes A , Benkirane M , Lin YL , Pasero P , SAMHD1 acts at stalled replication forks to prevent interferon induction, Nature, 557 (2018) 57-+.29670289
[204] Maelfait J , Bridgeman A , Benlahrech A , Cursi C , Rehwinkel J , Restriction by SAMHD1 Limits cGAS/STING-Dependent Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses to HIV-1, Cell Rep, 16 (2016) 1492–1501.27477283
[205] Mannion NM , Greenwood SM , Young R , Cox S , Brindle J , Read D , Nellaker C , Vesely C , Ponting CP , McLaughlin PJ , Jantsch MF , Dorin J , Adams IR , Scadden AD , Ohman M , Keegan LP , O’Connell MA , The RNA-editing enzyme ADAR1 controls innate immune responses to RNA, Cell Rep, 9 (2014) 1482–1494.25456137
[206] Liddicoat BJ , Piskol R , Chalk AM , Ramaswami G , Higuchi M , Hartner JC , Li JB , Seeburg PH , Walkley CR , RNA EDITING RNA editing by ADAR1 prevents MDA5 sensing of endogenous dsRNA as nonself, Science, 349 (2015) 1115–1120.26275108
[207] Wu B , Peisley A , Richards C , Yao H , Zeng X , Lin C , Chu F , Walz T , Hur S , Structural basis for dsRNA recognition, filament formation, and antiviral signal activation by MDA5, Cell, 152 (2013) 276–289.23273991
[208] Peisley A , Lin C , Wu B , Orme-Johnson M , Liu M , Walz T , Hur S , Cooperative assembly and dynamic disassembly of MDA5 filaments for viral dsRNA recognition, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 108 (2011) 21010–21015.22160685
[209] Ahmad S , Mu X , Yang F , Greenwald E , Park JW , Jacob E , Zhang CZ , Hur S , Breaching Self-Tolerance to Alu Duplex RNA Underlies MDA5-Mediated Inflammation, Cell, 172 (2018) 797–810 e713.29395326
[210] Uehara R , Cerritelli SM , Hasin N , Sakhuja K , London M , Iranzo J , Chon H , Grinberg A , Crouch RJ , Two RNase H2 Mutants with Differential rNMP Processing Activity Reveal a Threshold of Ribonucleotide Tolerance for Embryonic Development, Cell Reports, 25 (2018) 1135-+.
[211] Lavin MF , Ataxia-telangiectasia: from a rare disorder to a paradigm for cell signalling and cancer, Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol, 9 (2008) 759–769.18813293
[212] McKinnon PJ , ATM and the molecular pathogenesis of ataxia telangiectasia, Annual review of pathology, 7 (2012) 303–321.
[213] Shiloh Y , ATM: Expanding roles as a chief guardian of genome stability, Experimental cell research, (2014).
[214] McKinnon PJ , Genome integrity and disease prevention in the nervous system, Genes &amp; Development, 31 (2017) 1180–1194.28765160
[215] Shiloh Y , The cerebellar degeneration in ataxia-telangiectasia: A case for genome instability, DNA Repair (Amst), 95 (2020) 102950.
[216] McKinnon PJ , ATM and the Molecular Pathogenesis of Ataxia Telangiectasia, Annu Rev Pathol-Mech, 7 (2012) 303–321.
[217] Nowak-Wegrzyn A , Crawford TO , Winkelstein JA , Carson KA , Lederman HM , Immunodeficiency and infections in ataxia-telangiectasia, J Pediatr-Us, 144 (2004) 505–511.
[218] Noordzij JG , Wulffraat NM , Haraldsson A , Meyts I , van’t Veer LJ , Hogervorst FBL , Warris A , Weemaes CMR , Ataxia-telangiectasia patients presenting with hyper-IgM syndrome, Arch Dis Child, 94 (2009) 448–449.19224889
[219] Kraus M , Lev A , Simon AJ , Levran I , Nissenkorn A , Levi YB , Berkun Y , Efrati O , Amariglio N , Rechavi G , Somech R , Disturbed B and T cell homeostasis and neogenesis in patients with ataxia telangiectasia, J Clin Immunol, 34 (2014) 561–572.24789685
[220] Driessen GJ , IJspeert H , Weemaes CMR , Haraldsson A , Trip M , Warris A , van der Flier M , Wulffraat N , Verhagen MMM , Taylor MA , van Zelm MC , van Dongen JJM , van Deuren M , van der Burg M , Antibody deficiency in patients with ataxia telangiectasia is caused by disturbed B- and T-cell homeostasis and reduced immune repertoire diversity, J Allergy Clin Immun, 131 (2013) 1367–U1183.23566627
[221] Bredemeyer AL , Huang CY , Walker LM , Bassing CH , Sleckman BP , Aberrant V(D)J recombination in ataxia telangiectasia mutated-deficient lymphocytes is dependent on nonhomologous DNA end joining, Journal of Immunology, 181 (2008) 2620–2625.
[222] Lumsden JM , McCarty T , Petiniot LK , Shen R , Barlow C , Wynn TA , Morse HC , Gearhart PJ , Wynshaw-Boris A , Max EE , Hodes RJ , Immunoglobulin class switch recombination is impaired in Atm-deficient mice, Journal of Experimental Medicine, 200 (2004) 1111–1121.15504820
[223] Schroeder SA , Zielen S , Infections of the Respiratory System in Patients With AtaxiaTelangiectasia, Pediatr Pulm, 49 (2014) 389–399.
[224] Erttmann SF , Hartlova A , Sloniecka M , Raffi FAM , Hosseinzadeh A , Edgren T , Rofougaran R , Resch U , Fallman M , Ek T , Gekara NO , Loss of the DNA Damage Repair Kinase ATM Impairs Inflammasome-Dependent Anti-Bacterial Innate Immunity, Immunity, 45 (2016) 106–118.27421701
[225] Quek H , Luff J , Cheung K , Kozlov S , Gatei M , Lee CS , Bellingham MC , Noakes PG , Lim YC , Barnett NL , Dingwall S , Wolvetang E , Mashimo T , Roberts TL , Lavin MF , Rats with a missense mutation in Atm display neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration subsequent to accumulation of cytosolic DNA following unrepaired DNA damage, J Leukoc Biol, 101 (2017) 927–947.27895165
[226] Lane CA , Hardy J , Schott JM , Alzheimer’s disease, Eur J Neurol, 25 (2018) 59–70.28872215
[227] Forlenza OV , Diniz BS , Talib LL , Mendonca VA , Ojopi EB , Gattaz WF , Teixeira AL , Increased serum IL-1beta level in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment, Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord, 28 (2009) 507–512.19996595
[228] Fillit H , Ding W , Buee L , Kalman J , Altstiel L , Lawlor B , Wolfklein G , Elevated Circulating Tumor-Necrosis-Factor Levels in Alzheimers-Disease, Neurosci Lett, 129 (1991) 318–320.1745413
[229] Strauss S , Bauer J , Ganter U , Jonas U , Berger M , Volk B , Detection of Interleukin-6 and Alpha-2-Macroglobulin Immunoreactivity in Cortex and Hippocampus of Alzheimers-Disease Patients, Lab Invest, 66 (1992) 223–230.1370967
[230] Grammas P , Ovase R , Cerebrovascular Transforming Growth Factor-β Contributes to Inflammation in the Alzheimer’s Disease Brain, The American Journal of Pathology, 160 (2002) 1583–1587.12000710
[231] Szczepanik AM , Funes S , Petko W , Ringheim GE , IL-4, IL-10 and IL-13 modulate A beta(1−-42)-induced cytokine and chemokine production in primary murine microglia and a human monocyte cell line, J Neuroimmunol, 113 (2001) 49–62.11137576
[232] Barger SW , Harmon AD , Microglial activation by Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein and modulation by apolipoprotein E, Nature, 388 (1997) 878–881.9278049
[233] Bolmont T , Haiss F , Eicke D , Radde R , Mathis CA , Klunk WE , Kohsaka S , Jucker M , Calhoun ME , Dynamics of the microglial/amyloid interaction indicate a role in plaque maintenance, J Neurosci, 28 (2008) 4283–4292.18417708
[234] Hickman SE , Allison EK , El Khoury J , Microglial dysfunction and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways in aging Alzheimer’s disease mice, J Neurosci, 28 (2008) 8354–8360.18701698
[235] Stalder M , Phinney A , Probst A , Sommer B , Staufenbiel M , Jucker M , Association of microglia with amyloid plaques in brains of APP23 transgenic mice, Am J Pathol, 154 (1999) 1673–1684.10362792
[236] Verkhratsky A , Olabarria M , Noristani HN , Yeh CY , Rodriguez JJ , Astrocytes in Alzheimer’s disease, Neurotherapeutics, 7 (2010) 399–412.20880504
[237] Nagele RG , D’Andrea MR , Lee H , Venkataraman V , Wang H-Y , Astrocytes accumulate Aβ42 and give rise to astrocytic amyloid plaques in Alzheimer disease brains, Brain Research, 971 (2003) 197–209.12706236
[238] Karch CM , Cruchaga C , Goate AM , Alzheimer’s disease genetics: from the bench to the clinic, Neuron, 83 (2014) 11–26.24991952
[239] Gratuze M , Leyns CEG , Holtzman DM , New insights into the role of TREM2 in Alzheimer’s disease, Mol Neurodegener, 13 (2018) 66.30572908
[240] Hu N , Tan MS , Yu JT , Sun L , Tan L , Wang YL , Jiang T , Tan L , Increased Expression of TREM2 in Peripheral Blood of Alzheimer’s Disease Patients, J Alzheimers Dis, 38 (2014) 497–501.24002183
[241] Tan YJ , Ng ASL , Vipin A , Lim JKW , Chander RJ , Ji F , Qiu Y , Ting SKS , Hameed S , Lee TS , Zeng L , Kandiah N , Zhou J , Higher Peripheral TREM2 mRNA Levels Relate to Cognitive Deficits and Hippocampal Atrophy in Alzheimer’s Disease and Amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment, J Alzheimers Dis, 58 (2017) 413–423.28453482
[242] Guerreiro R , Wojtas A , Bras J , Carrasquillo M , Rogaeva E , Majounie E , Cruchaga C , Sassi C , Kauwe JS , Younkin S , Hazrati L , Collinge J , Pocock J , Lashley T , Williams J , Lambert JC , Amouyel P , Goate A , Rademakers R , Morgan K , Powell J , St George-Hyslop P , Singleton A , Hardy J , Alzheimer Genetic Analysis G , TREM2 variants in Alzheimer’s disease, N Engl J Med, 368 (2013) 117–127.23150934
[243] Rayaprolu S , Mullen B , Baker M , Lynch T , Finger E , Seeley WW , Hatanpaa KJ , Lomen-Hoerth C , Kertesz A , Bigio EH , Lippa C , Josephs KA , Knopman DS , White CL , Caselli R , Mackenzie IR , Miller BL , Boczarska-Jedynak M , Opala G , Krygowska-Wajs A , Barcikowska M , Younkin SG , Petersen RC , Ertekin-Taner N , Uitti RJ , Meschia JF , Boylan KB , Boeve BF , Graff-Radford NR , Wszolek ZK , Dickson DW , Rademakers R , Ross OA , TREM2 in neurodegeneration: evidence for association of the p.R47H variant with frontotemporal dementia and Parkinson’s disease, Molecular Neurodegeneration, 8 (2013).
[244] Kwiatkowski D , Czarny P , Toma M , Jurkowska N , Sliwinska A , Drzewoski J , Bachurska A , Szemraj J , Maes M , Berk M , Su KP , Galecki P , Sliwinski T , Associations between DNA Damage, DNA Base Excision Repair Gene Variability and Alzheimer’s Disease Risk, Dement Geriatr Cogn, 41 (2016) 152–171.
[245] Martin LJ , DNA damage and repair: Relevance to mechanisms of neurodegeneration, J Neuropath Exp Neur, 67 (2008) 377–387.18431258
[246] Obulesu M , Rao DM , DNA Damage and Impairment of DNA Repair in Alzheimer’s Disease, Int J Neurosci, 120 (2010) 397–403.20504209
[247] Yu H , Harrison FE , Xia F , Altered DNA repair; an early pathogenic pathway in Alzheimer’s disease and obesity, Sci Rep, 8 (2018) 5600.29618789
[248] Wang J , Xiong S , Xie C , Markesbery WR , Lovell MA , Increased oxidative damage in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Neurochemistry, 93 (2005) 953–962.15857398
[249] Lyras L , Cairns NJ , Jenner A , Jenner P , Halliwell B , An assessment of oxidative damage to proteins, lipids, and DNA in brain from patients with Alzheimer’s disease, Journal of Neurochemistry, 68 (1997) 2061–2069.9109533
[250] Mullaart E , Boerrigter ME , Ravid R , Swaab DF , Vijg J , Increased levels of DNA breaks in cerebral cortex of Alzheimer’s disease patients, Neurobiol Aging, 11 (1990) 169–173.2362649
[251] Suberbielle E , Sanchez PE , Kravitz AV , Wang X , Ho K , Eilertson K , Devidze N , Kreitzer AC , Mucke L , Physiologic brain activity causes DNA double-strand breaks in neurons, with exacerbation by amyloid-beta, Nat Neurosci, 16 (2013) 613–621.23525040
[252] Suberbielle E , Djukic B , Evans M , Kim DH , Taneja P , Wang X , Finucane M , Knox J , Ho K , Devidze N , Masliah E , Mucke L , DNA repair factor BRCA1 depletion occurs in Alzheimer brains and impairs cognitive function in mice, Nature Communications, 6 (2015).
[253] Tysnes OB , Storstein A , Epidemiology of Parkinson’s disease, J Neural Transm (Vienna), 124 (2017) 901–905.28150045
[254] Kalia LV , Lang AE , Parkinson’s disease, The Lancet, 386 (2015) 896–912.
[255] Gonzalez-Hunt CP , Sanders LH , DNA damage and repair in Parkinson’s disease: Recent advances and new opportunities, J Neurosci Res, 99 (2021) 180–189.32048327
[256] Sepe S , Milanese C , Gabriels S , Derks KW , Payan-Gomez C , van IWF , Rijksen YM , Nigg AL , Moreno S , Cerri S , Blandini F , Hoeijmakers JH , Mastroberardino PG , Inefficient DNA Repair Is an Aging-Related Modifier of Parkinson’s Disease, Cell Rep, 15 (2016) 1866–1875.27210754
[257] Kam TI , Mao X , Park H , Chou SC , Karuppagounder SS , Umanah GE , Yun SP , Brahmachari S , Panicker N , Chen R , Andrabi SA , Qi C , Poirier GG , Pletnikova O , Troncoso JC , Bekris LM , Leverenz JB , Pantelyat A , Ko HS , Rosenthal LS , Dawson TM , Dawson VL , Poly(ADP-ribose) drives pathologic alpha-synuclein neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease, Science, 362 (2018).
[258] Milanese C , Cerri S , Ulusoy A , Gornati SV , Plat A , Gabriels S , Blandini F , Di Monte DA , Hoeijmakers JH , Mastroberardino PG , Activation of the DNA damage response in vivo in synucleinopathy models of Parkinson’s disease, Cell Death Dis, 9 (2018) 818.30050065
[259] Chen HL , Zhang SMM , Hernan MA , Schwarzschild MA , Willett WC , Colditz GA , Speizer FE , Ascherio A , Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and the risk of Parkinson disease, Arch Neurol-Chicago, 60 (2003) 1059–1064.12925360
[260] Rees K , Stowe R , Patel S , Ives N , Breen K , Clarke CE , Ben-Shlomo Y , Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as disease-modifying agents for Parkinson’s disease: evidence from observational studies, Cochrane Database Syst Rev, (2011) CD008454.22071848
[261] Liu X , Cheng R , Verbitsky M , Kisselev S , Browne A , Mejia-Sanatana H , Louis ED , Cote LJ , Andrews H , Waters C , Ford B , Frucht S , Fahn S , Marder K , Clark LN , Lee JH , Genome-wide association study identifies candidate genes for Parkinson’s disease in an Ashkenazi Jewish population, BMC Med Genet, 12 (2011) 104.21812969
[262] Pihlstrom L , Axelsson G , Bjornara KA , Dizdar N , Fardell C , Forsgren L , Holmberg B , Larsen JP , Linder J , Nissbrandt H , Tysnes OB , Ohman E , Dietrichs E , Toft M , Supportive evidence for 11 loci from genome-wide association studies in Parkinson’s disease, Neurobiol Aging, 34 (2013) 1708 e1707–1713.
[263] Wahner AD , Sinsheimer JS , Bronstein JM , Ritz B , Inflammatory cytokine gene polymorphisms and increased risk of Parkinson disease, Arch Neurol-Chicago, 64 (2007) 836–840.17562931
[264] Reale M , Iarlori C , Thomas A , Gambi D , Perfetti B , Di Nicola M , Onofrj M , Peripheral cytokines profile in Parkinson’s disease, Brain Behav Immun, 23 (2009) 55–63.18678243
[265] Dobbs RJ , Charlett A , Purkiss AG , Dobbs SM , Weller C , Peterson DW , Association of circulating TNF-alpha and IL-6 with ageing and parkinsonism, Acta Neurol Scand, 100 (1999) 34–41.10416510
[266] Mogi M , Harada M , Kondo T , Riederer P , Inagaki H , Minami M , Nagatsu T , Interleukin1 beta, interleukin-6, epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor-alpha are elevated in the brain from parkinsonian patients, Neurosci Lett, 180 (1994) 147–150.7700568
[267] Mogi M , Harada M , Riederer P , Narabayashi H , Fujita K , Nagatsu T , Tumor-Necrosis-Factor-Alpha (Tnf-Alpha) Increases Both in the Brain and in the Cerebrospinal-Fluid from Parkinsonian-Patients, Neurosci Lett, 165 (1994) 208–210.8015728
[268] Gerhard A , Pavese N , Hotton G , Turkheimer F , Es M , Hammers A , Eggert K , Oertel W , Banati RB , Brooks DJ , In vivo imaging of microglial activation with [11C](R)-PK11195 PET in idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, Neurobiol Dis, 21 (2006) 404–412.16182554
[269] Iannaccone S , Cerami C , Alessio M , Garibotto V , Panzacchi A , Olivieri S , Gelsomino G , Moresco RM , Perani D , In vivo microglia activation in very early dementia with Lewy bodies, comparison with Parkinson’s disease, Parkinsonism Relat Disord, 19 (2013) 47–52.22841687
[270] Brochard V , Combadiere B , Prigent A , Laouar Y , Perrin A , Beray-Berthat V , Bonduelle O , Alvarez-Fischer D , Callebert J , Launay JM , Duyckaerts C , Flavell RA , Hirsch EC , Hunot S , Infiltration of CD4(+) lymphocytes into the brain contributes to neurodegeneration in a mouse model of Parkinson disease, Journal of Clinical Investigation, 119 (2009) 182–192.19104149
[271] McGeer PL , Itagaki S , Boyes BE , McGeer EG , Reactive microglia are positive for HLA-DR in the substantia nigra of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease brains, Neurology, 38 (1988) 1285–1291.3399080
[272] Harms AS , Cao S , Rowse AL , Thome AD , Li X , Mangieri LR , Cron RQ , Shacka JJ , Raman C , Standaert DG , MHCII is required for alpha-synuclein-induced activation of microglia, CD4 T cell proliferation, and dopaminergic neurodegeneration, J Neurosci, 33 (2013) 9592–9600.23739956
[273] Harms AS , Delic V , Thome AD , Bryant N , Liu Z , Chandra S , Jurkuvenaite A , West AB , alpha-Synuclein fibrils recruit peripheral immune cells in the rat brain prior to neurodegeneration, Acta Neuropathol Commun, 5 (2017) 85.29162163
[274] Wang L , Wen MY , Cao XT , Nuclear hnRNPA2B1 initiates and amplifies the innate immune response to DNA viruses, Science, 365 (2019) 656-+.
[275] Gentili M , Lahaye X , Nadalin F , Nader GFP , Lombardi EP , Herve S , De Silva NS , Rookhuizen DC , Zueva E , Goudot C , Maurin M , Bochnakian A , Amigorena S , Piel M , Fachinetti D , Londono-Vallejo A , Manel N , The N-Terminal Domain of cGAS Determines Preferential Association with Centromeric DNA and Innate Immune Activation in the Nucleus, Cell Reports, 26 (2019) 2377-+.
[276] Liu HP , Zhang HP , Wu XY , Ma DP , Wu JH , Wang L , Jiang Y , Fei YY , Zhu CG , Tan R , Jungblut P , Pei G , Dorhoi A , Yan QL , Zhang F , Zheng RJ , Liu SY , Liang HJ , Liu ZH , Yang H , Chen JX , Wang P , Tang TQ , Peng WX , Hu ZS , Xu Z , Huang XC , Wang J , Li HH , Zhou YL , Liu F , Yan DP , Kaufmann SHE , Chen C , Mao ZY , Ge BX , Nuclear cGAS suppresses DNA repair and promotes tumorigenesis, Nature, 563 (2018) 131-+.
[277] Luecke S , Holleufer A , Christensen MH , Jonsson KL , Boni GA , Sorensen LK , Johannsen M , Jakobsen MR , Hartmann R , Paludan SR , cGAS is activated by DNA in a length-dependent manner, Embo Rep, 18 (2017) 1707–1715.28801534
[278] Zhou W , Whiteley AT , de Oliveira Mann CC , Morehouse BR , Nowak RP , Fischer ES , Gray NS , Mekalanos JJ , Kranzusch PJ , Structure of the Human cGAS-DNA Complex Reveals Enhanced Control of Immune Surveillance, Cell, 174 (2018) 300–311 e311.30007416
[279] Cox DJ , Field RH , Williams DG , Baran M , Bowie AG , Cunningham C , Dunne A , DNA sensors are expressed in astrocytes and microglia in vitro and are upregulated during gliosis in neurodegenerative disease, Glia, 63 (2015) 812–825.25627810
